- The following is a conversation
with Rick Beato, legendary
music educator, interviewer,
producer, songwriter, and a true
multi-instrument musician, playing guitar,
bass, cello, and piano. Rick, with his
incredible YouTube channel,
celebrates great musicians and
musical ideas, and helps
millions of people, including
me, fall in love with great music all over
again. This is the Lex
Fridman Podcast. To support
it, please check out our sponsors
in the description, where you can
also find links to contact
me, ask questions, give
feedback, and so on. And now, dear
friends, here's Rick Beato. You had, I
think, an incredibly fun and
diverse beginning to your music
journey. I heard somewhere that one of
the things that made you fall in love
with music was listening to guitar
solos, some epic guitar solos.
What's an early guitar solo that you
remember you connected to spiritually,
musically, where you're like,
"Wow, there's magic in this"?
- Well, the first solo that I learned
was "Hey Joe." It was actually a good
beginner song, you know, when
I first started playing the
guitar, because it has pretty simple
chords, right? So it's like E, C, G, D, A.
And I learned the solo, and I figured
out this, like, I'll say it's this
pentatonic scale, E minor pentatonic scale though.
I didn't know that's what it was called, but
learned this thing, and it's like,
"Whoa, he's just in this one shape
here." Now, there was no... You
couldn't go look anything up. You
just, if you could figure out the notes,
you noticed that there was a little pattern
to it. And then I got so
obsessed with it, and I showed
my younger brother John, who started playing
guitar right at the same time I did.
So I was 14, he was 11. And I
would play rhythm for him for five
minutes while he would solo over
Hey Joe. And then as soon as I'd start soloing,
he'd throw the guitar down, then we'd get in a
fight. And so my mom eventually was
like, "What is going on here?" And I was
like, "John won't play rhythm."
"John won't play rhythm for me." She's
like, "Okay, I'll play rhythm for you.
What, what are the chords?" And—
- That's awesome.
- ... I was like, "Okay,
it's like E, C, G, D, A."
And so my mom would literally play
rhythm for 20 minutes while I'd play.
- Hashtag parenting.
- That's amazing. When I look back on
it now, my mom's been gone for 10
years now. When I look back on it, it's
like, "My God, my parents were so cool."
- We should mention that "Hey Joe," and
Hendrix in general, is kind of known
for the rhythm not being simple rhythm,
just the chords that you mentioned.
It's what you do with those chords. It's
almost improvisation, the rhythm side.
- He did all those really cool chord
fragments, riffs, and things like that,
that's just part of his...
That's the Hendrix style.
- What do you think? I mean, many people put
Hendrix as the greatest guitarist of all time.
What do you think is part of that?
- You know, I make lists.
- You do. If you somehow don't
know who Rick Beato is,
go on YouTube right now
and watch your excellent
interviews with musicians, watch your
breakdown analysis of different songs,
and watch your top 20 lists, where you're
very opinionated, sometimes very
openly critical about certain
kinds of songs. It's
fun. Opinions are fun.
- But they do change, Lex, from day to day.
- Yeah, exactly.
- You know, like I... But when, anytime
I do a list, if I do 20, I like to do
20 because that gives me some leeway
to throw in. I have to throw in
something that is so
weird that people, you
know... So, something that
a lot of people won't know,
just to have it on there, so I can
at least introduce a per- you know,
I'll put somebody like a- Allan
Holdsworth, who's a famous fusion guitar
player. I'll throw in one of his
solos or something. Just some, some
oddball solo in there, just so that people,
as they're listening down the list, will get
exposed to something they would
not necessarily get exposed to.
- Yeah, a lot of variety. But Hendrix...
Did you show up here today, Rick,
try to tell me that Hendrix is not up there?
I just am getting that vibe right now.
- No, I'm not. I, but I don't
want to say greatest, you
know... You, you can say, well, there, there
are people that inspired Jimi Hendrix.
Charlie Christian, older guitar players.
Charlie Christian, Django Reinhardt
were the first two really
big, and probably, and Andrés
Segovia were, were three
of the giants of the
20th century, as far as guitar
influences for most of the
players that were to follow.
- So here, going to Perplexity, Django
Reinhardt was, of course, a jazz guitarist
and composer, active mainly in France,
and is widely regarded as one of the
greatest guitarists in jazz history.
- So, Django was... Well,
there's a huge movement
right now, Gypsy Jazz
Movement, as they call it-
... that is kind of built
around this style of
music that he played back in the
early 20th century. One of the things
about Django is that he was in a fire,
and he had two of his third
and fourth finger, so
his ring finger and pinky were
essentially melted together. He had
no use of them. Although he could use
them while he was chording, but a lot of
these incredibly fast lines, he's just
playing with two fingers. And it's amazing.
- That... What is that?
So that's Gypsy Jazz.
- That's Gypsy Jazz, yeah.
Him, Stéphane Grappelli was a
violinist that played with him a lot.
- How much of this is improvisation?
- Everything he's doing there is improvised.
- It feels so free. And fun like
swing, and then at least you said
pre-bebop. So bebop was a kind of
jazz that was also influential
on you in your own life
journey. And it's this
complicated, legendary kind of jazz that
was very influential on the music that
followed. So what was bebop?
- Well, after the big
bands were happening in
the, you know, from the
'20s through the '40s,
Small, people would go out and
play in small groups that they
would tour with. And Charlie Parker,
who's really kind of the, one of the
main figures of early bebop,
really developed the language of
it. Usually, the music that they're playing
over are standard chord progressions-
... that they would use
as vehicles to improvise
over. A lot of them were AA,
BA form. And Charlie Parker
created this language
of improvisation that
was far more sophisticated
than the swing players
of the big band era. You know,
think of people like Benny
Goodman of that era. They
would have really fast tempo
songs, angular lines, chromaticism,
things like that, chromatic notes.
- Chromatic notes are just
notes next to each other on-
- Next to each other, yeah
- ... on the keyboard.
- I like to think of it as connecting notes.
- Connecting. You're putting in more notes
than are supposed to be there and so
doing, creating some interesting texture.
- Yeah, so that is one of the most difficult
styles to master, because all
these things are a language.
Blues playing, they're all just languages,
right? It's like, just like you'd learn
any type of language. My dad loved
bebop. Now, when I was a little kid
and he's listening to these bebop
records, whether it's Charlie
Parker or Dizzy Gillespie
or Oscar Peterson, Joe
Pass, great jazz guitar
player, I'm just hearing this stuff. I don't know
any different. My dad was not a musician, but for
some reason, he liked
incredibly sophisticated-
... music that was very technical. And,
I just heard it and just was like, "Oh,
yeah, okay, cool." And not realizing that
it was developing my ear, because I
really, bebop is one of the hardest
to improvise in that style, in
that language of bebop. It's
very difficult to do. And hearing
it as a kid is one of the things
that I think enables you, just like
languages, enables you to learn it
as opposed to somebody that's never been exposed
to it and tries to learn it as a teenager.
So I think it's very similar to
learning languages, which kinda
is like my theory on perfect pitch,
that every child is born with
perfect pitch. And they start to
lose the ability around nine months-
... when people become
culturally bound listeners,
when babies do. They start
out as citizens of the
world, you know? They can,
they have the the neural
pathways to hear the sounds, the phonemes
of all 6,500 languages spoken on Earth.
But then around nine months, they
begin to lose that ability and
they, when they become these
culturally bound listeners, there's a
great YouTube video with this woman,
Patricia Kuhl. She's a language researcher.
And I watched this, The
linguistic genius of babies.
I saw this in 2010, this lecture
that she did, like a TED
Talk, and she talks about this,
that kids, they did a, an
experiment. They exposed kids to
Mandarin three times a week for
25-minute sessions, just a
person speaking Mandarin to
these babies. And they were able
to recognize the sounds, the phonemes
of that language even later on.
And when I realized that
my son Dylan had perfect
pitch, I thought, "Why does Dylan
have perfect pitch but no one
in my family had ever had perfect
pitch?" And I thought, "Well, it must be
because of the things I exposed to him
prenatally and then in the
first nine months of his life."
'Cause that's the only
way I could explain it.
- We're gonna return to Joe Pass. We gotta
go to Dylan. You mentioned Dylan. I guess
that's in part one of
the origin stories of
you putting out videos into the
world, is the early videos you
did with Dylan, a set of videos on his
perfect pitch. And for people who don't
know, maybe you can speak to
what perfect pitch means.
- It's the ability to identify any note
without a reference tone. So you can play,
it doesn't matter how quickly they
are, that a person with perfect pitch
can hear a note and immediately
identify it. Or a collection of notes.
- And taking a tangent upon a tangent,
you also have a course on ear training.
- Yes, but my course is for relative pitch-
- Relative pitch
- ... not to be confused with perfect pitch.
- Is it fair to say that relative pitch, as
far as the thing you would learn, is more
useful-
- Yes
- ... for musicians?
- Yes.
- Can you explain the
difference between the two?
- Relative pitch is basically learning
how to identify pitches relative to
a stated tonic or something that
you've heard, or just relative
to each other. If you hear a note
and then you hear another note after
it, you can recognize, let's say, it's
a minor third interval. So if you're on
the note A, the next note would be C.
So once you're given a reference note,
you can use relative pitch to identify the
relative nature from one pitch to another.
- And of course, intervals make up
scales, and intervals make up chords-
- Chords, yup.
- ... and so that if you
develop it to any degree
relative pitch, you can understand,
you can hear the music better.
- Yes.
- Um, what does it take since we're
taking a tangent on a tangent, what's
what does it take to train
your ear? What's a TL;DR
on the course before
people go out and sign up?
- It's just practice basically.
You start with intervals.
Typically, with small intervals like minor
second, major second. So minor second would
be a half-step, major second
would be a whole-step.
- Are you listening to the tone one after
the other or two of them together?
- Both. So played separately it's called
melodic intervals, right, like a melody?
And harmonic intervals are played like a
harmony, together. So you have to be able to
identify them both, both ways.
- What's an early journey? Like, we'll give
people a preview of what they should...
Like, what does that look like?
What does practice look like?
- Well, my course, it will play
you an interval, and then you
identify it by clicking on whether
it's, you know, a major third, or minor
third, or major sixth, or minor sixth, or
perfect fifth, or tritone, whatever it is.
And it will teach you gradually, over
time, how to recognize all the intervals.
- So you listen to a melodic interval
or a harmonic interval. How quickly
does the ear in the various
age groups that we humans are
in, how quickly does the
ear learn the different
intervals? Is it a week? Two weeks?
A month? Two months? Five years?
- I think you'd do it pretty quickly. Within,
you know, if you practice, within a couple of
months, you can really make a lot of
progress on it, if you practice daily.
- What benefit does it have to
you as a musician in general?
- Well, it's great if you wanna hear a chord
progression if you're trying to figure out a song.
And you can say, "Oh, that's going from the
six minor chord, or the four major, to the
five major, to the one major."
And you can just identify it immediately, and then you
figure out what the first chord is, then you know what
the rest of the chords are 'cause
they're in relation to whatever
that first chord is. And for
learning solos, for example,
or learning melodies, being
able to sound something out.
- Now, do you recommend people
couple that with music
theory in terms of education,
the education journey?
- They have to be taught together because
these terms are really music theory, right?
Those intervals, major second, minor
second, major third, minor third, perfect
fourth. So as you're doing that, and then
you... Once you learn
the intervals, the 12
intervals in an octave, then you
learn 'em both melodically and
harmonically, so played together
and separate. Then you learn
chords, and so then you learn
to identify major, minor,
diminished, augmented, suspended chords,
things like that. Well, you're basically
learning music theory at the same time
with that. 'Cause learning... Music theory
is just the name of things in music.
- So there's the sound of things.
There's the name of things, and then
there's the haptic, like playing the thing-
- Right
- ... probably. So playing chords, playing
scales, you have, I believe, a course on scales
and on chords? Okay. Since we're doing the
tangent, let's go. How do you recommend
people... There's a bunch of people
listening to this that are curious about
how they can start in playing guitar,
maybe even playing piano and maybe
maybe playing other instruments. Although
guitar, of course, is the greatest
instrument of all time.
What are the early steps of that journey?
What do you recommend people do in general?
- Well, if you're a beginner
getting a good beginner guitar course and
learning, first of all, the open chords
in first position. A lot of songs
can be played that way. A lot
of old songs can be played that way,
maybe not new modern songs necessarily.
- So learning a few chords and with an
eye towards maybe playing a song?
- Yeah. With an eye towards... You learn the
chord shapes and you learn how to strum
basic patterns to begin
with. I think the first
thing for learning guitar
is actually how to position
your fingers so that you don't mute
strings that you don't want to mute.
That's the hardest thing for people to
do, basically, is to get their fingers
arched to where they... If you're
playing a C major chord, your
index finger's on the first fret of the B string,
and you have to have that open E string ringing
there. And it's hard for
people to make those micro-
microadjustments. You take it for granted,
like, you've been playing guitar-
... for, I don't know, how
many years? Forever, right?
- Forever, yeah.
- And you don't even think about stuff like
that when you're playing a guitar solo.
Every little thing that you do if you're
playing your Comfortably Numb guitar solo-
... you have to, out of mid-air, strike
the string that your finger's on to play
the note. And these are all fine
adjustments that you're doing.
- I'm just a hobbyist recreational player,
but it... Wow, you're taking me all the way
back. You're right, it's the haptic, the
physical aspect of it is really
tricky. Comfortably Numb is a good
example, but if you do lead,
you have to get a super
clean sound. Now, that's both
when you're playing fast, you
want it to be super precise, but when
you play slow, when you have one note,
and you're holding it, and you're bending
it- ... it better be really clean.
And for that, it's... I guess you have
to really place the finger in the right
place. Plus, there's
the... Well, there's the
calluses, so it doesn't hurt. And then the
positioning of the string
on the curvature of-
... of the finger. Where does it fall?
Like, how much do you bend the finger?
- You have to have enough flesh
on it to actually raise
the- raise the string
and pitch. Otherwise it-
- Yeah, 'cause you're lifting it with part
of the flesh. And of course, you have to
decide, depends on how OCD you
are, do you wanna be, like, the
perfect, the proper musician?
Or do you wanna do a
Hendrix? So the thumb over the top.
- Way over the top, yes.
- And so, like, you... if you have
a fretboard here, I think the
more, like, classical guitarists, the
very proper, perfect perpendicular
alignment of the fingertips
to the fretboard, versus,
like, Hendrix's, like, "Fuck it. You
nerds. I'm gonna do it." With the
messiness is part of the
magic. Of course, like
B.B. King is also kind of
messy looking in terms of his
positioning of the fingers, but
his tone is incredibly clean.
- Yes, super clean.
- So, like, that teaches you that
maybe any position can converge
towards a super clean tone. You
just have to figure it out.
- I think a lot of it has to do with
how they wear their guitars. If you wear your guitar
low, if you're Hendrix and you're wearing your
guitar
- That's true
- ... if you're wearing it lower,
then you can't get your fingers
on top of it like that. And the thumb
acts as a way to mute the lower
strings from ringing if you're playing
through a loud amplifier. So there's
so many other micro-adjustments when you're
playing leads, 'cause you have to kind
of mute the other strings that
are... so they don't ring out-
... if you're playing the first note in
Comfortably Numb and the solo at the
end, and you're at the ninth fret
of the G string, and you bend that
... if you bend that G string and you
accidentally hit the B string under it
... you don't want that ringing. So you have
to kind of angle your index finger so it
- To mute
- ... to mute that.
So all these micro-adjustments that you don't
even think about... I mean, you're not thinking
about that, Lex, when you're playing
it. You've done it so many times that
these things are just part of
your brain. That's why this is
such a great brain developer
for kids to learn instruments.
- Yeah, of course, you have to solve that
puzzle. It must be really frustrating in the
beginning, like holding a chord. Like
all of 'em, and it hurts too, right?
- It does hurt.
- If you're doing acoustic guitar.
- Not for that long,
though. For like a week.
- Couple, couple, yeah.
- Couple weeks.
- Couple.
- I don't want to discourage anyone, you
know. It's actually pretty easy to learn
basic stuff.
- Right, but the pain is temporary, I
guess is the point I'm trying to make.
- It is.
- Uh, so what else? So the
physical component, play a few
chords, where does the journey
continue if you're learning guitar?
- Well then, it's like if you play
electric guitar, then you get into
single note playing and stuff like that. That's
where it gets, to me, where it gets really
fun. You know, you have single
note playing with riffs,
if you think of Back in
Black, right, that has a riff
embedded in the actual melody. Or many
songs that have riffs, the
Hendrix stuff that has chordal
riffs, and you're moving up the neck and,
Involving all the fingers and things like
that. So there's... it really depends
on what you wanna, what
styles you wanna play.
- So you're thinking about song learning.
So different components of song learning.
So riffs in songs, lead-in songs.
- And then you have finger picking, if you
have Stairway to Heaven, songs like that.
How 'bout wanting to learn that, that
involves finger picking, because the, you
have to isolate certain notes
of the chord and play two
together, you know, and multiple times.
- There's a few crossroads where
you get to select things. Uh,
so I guess you're speaking to the fact there's
a... if you're righty, there's a right hand
that you can use your fingers
or you can use a pick.
- Correct.
- And that's a choice you make.
- And sometimes you use both, 'cause in Stairway
to Heaven, you're using the fingers at
the beginning, or fingers
and pick, hybrid, they call
it hybrid picking, and then later
on, you're using the pick to
flat pick the picking patterns.
- On the music theory front, do you recommend
people learn scales and chords and like the
theory of it?
- Uh, later on I would say. I wouldn't
say necessarily right off the bat.
I think learning songs is the
first thing that you should
do 'cause that you want
to keep people motivated.
- So you get them to like fall in
love with music and playing?
- Yes.
- All right. And that takes a
couple months, three months?
- Depends on how motivated they are.
- So you recommend practicing,
what, every day?
- Every day. My son, Dylan, when he started
learning the guitar a couple years
ago, I said, "It's better to practice
10 minutes a day, seven days a
week than to practice one day
for an hour, which is roughly
the same amount of time."
- Yeah, but it usually turns into
something longer. But otherwise,
like, if you're a busy life,
you know, taking a day off,
that day turns into a week, and then a week turns into
a month, and all of a sudden you haven't touched the
instrument for months.
- Which is why I leave my guitar
on a stand all the time, so
that if I walk by it, I'm like, "Oh, okay, I'll
just pick it up for a second." Then that second
turns into 10 minutes,
and an hour, two hours.
- All right, we gotta talk about this Dylan
video. So this might be one of the earliest-
- That's the first one.
- That's the first video on the channel.
- It was, it was actually before the channel,
'cause this actually blew up on Facebook-
- Facebook
- ... and then I put it on YouTube after.
- Uh, so if it's okay?
- Yeah. Okay, Dylan, we're gonna do
the hardest ear training test of all
time. Are you ready?
- Ready. Oh.
- Now, I... just a quick backstory on this.
I made this for my friend Shane's wife
who wanted to see... 'cause Shane was a-
a friend that I was
producing, and he was there,
and Dylan had come down the day, in the day, and
I said, "Oh, check this out," and I played this
stuff. He's like, "That's amazing. Can
you make a video so I can show my wife?"
And I was on the way to a school board meeting,
'cause I was on the school board at Dylan's
school-
... and I said, "Hey, Dylan, come downstairs.
I want to make this video. It'll take one
minute, just need to do this thing for my
friend, Shane." And he's like, "I don't want
to." And I said, "Come on, this'll take
one minute." "I don't want to." So I said
to my wife, I'm like, "Nina, would you tell
Dylan to come downstairs? I want to do this
video. It'll take one minute." She's like,
Dylan, go downstairs." And he had,
he has a mouthful of candy there-
... 'cause he was eating candy. So if
you look at him, he literally has a
mouthful of candy while he's doing this.
- And we should say, on
Facebook it went quite viral.
- Yeah, like got... I don't know, 80
million views. Something like, it
had like 250,000 comments.
Something like that. Insane.
- How old is Dylan here?
- He's eight.
- Eight years old?
- Yeah.
- Can you actually give some more backstory about,
like, how you discovered that Dylan has perfect
pitch?
- So when Dylan was about two, he... I was
doing a FaceTime with my brother
Jon, and I was like, "Check this
out, Jon." And I played the Stone in
Love, Neal Schon's solo from Journey,
and I was like, "Check this
out." And Dylan would sing along
and my brother Jon was like, "Wow,
Dylan can sing all the notes." And I was like,
"Yeah." Then I played Black Dog, Zeppelin-
... and Dylan would sing that. And it's like,
"Dylan's got a good ear." Then Jon and I
were like, "Well, we have good ears, too." So it was probably...
Maybe we could have done that when we were that age.
So a couple years, more years goes by. Well,
he was about three and a half, and I'm in the
car. I was like, "Dylan, sing the Star
Wars theme." And he sings it, and I'm
like, "That's in the right
key." And I checked. I
play it on my phone, and I was like, "Oh my
gosh." Then I ask him, "Play... Sing the Superman
theme." Because we'd been listening to
John Williams soundtracks the week before,
and he sings that. And that was in
the right key. And I ask him another
song. So I turn the car around, I
go back to the studio. I go to the
piano, I hit the note B-flat,
and Dylan says, "Star
Wars." Star Wars starts on a
big B-flat major chord, but
it's the note B-flat is the main one
that you hear. And then I play the
note G, and he goes, "Superman." And that's
the first note in the trumpet part of the-
...of the Superman theme. And then I
realized that he had perfect pitch, and then
in five minutes, I taught him
the name of the 12 notes.
Which he already knew, but he
just didn't know the names.
- Oh, so you just associate the names—
- Yeah
- ...of the thing he knows. What do you think
is this in his mind? 'Cause it's not just
individual notes. He can, like,
hear everything. What is that?
- He doesn't see colors. He just says
every note sounds completely different.
- Wow. Like you said, maybe
it's a language thing.
Because it really is a... He
just learned the language.
- Yeah, the language.
- There's-
- It's like, it's like perfect
it's like native music
fluency, if you think of it like that.
- So let's listen to some of this.
- Turn around. Here we go. As fast as you can, we're going
to start with single notes, then we're going to do some
intervals, then chords. Okay, here we
go. A. C-sharp. B-flat. C. D. A-flat.
- Okay, good. Two notes at once. Here we go.
- C-flat. Great. How about this? B-flat, A.
Great. What about this? B-flat, A-flat.
- This is incredible.
- Great. How about this? C, B-flat.
- And then how about this?
- E-flat. What is it? E, E-flat. Correct.
Okay. He's, he's annoyed. He's annoyed.
The part of this, when I play
these next chords, that's really
I think why the video went so
viral, the next part of this.
Where I play these super complex polychords.
Okay, I'm going to do some polychords
for you. These are really going to
be hard. You ready? What's this?
C augmented over D-flat augmented. Okay,
sing a B-flat. Mm. Very good. What's this
chord? Uh... A-flat— Oh, A-flat major
over A major. Great, sing an F-sharp. Mm.
Excellent. What's this chord? A minor over
D-flat major. Great. What's this chord?
E add 9 over F major. Excellent. E add 9 over F
major. So I had to look at my hand to make sure that
that's what it was— ...'cause
they're all in inversions.
So I think the reason that this
went so viral is that the more that
someone knew about music, the
more that they shared the
video. Because these polychords... So
the people that were the best musicians
were li- were... Would... Looked at it and
was like, "Oh my God." You know, it's C
augmented over D-flat augmented.
Um, and the the second chord
was A-flat major over A
major, but they were both in inversion,
right? So it was like a first
inversion A-flat major chord, first
inversion A major chord. And then
an A minor over D-flat major,
and then E add 9 over F major.
And for an eight-year-old...
I mean, for anyone—
... plus they're all close-voiced. They're
all just right next to each other.
- Yeah, yeah.
- It's not like, you know, where you can hear them
clear. It's all in the mid-range of the piano.
So you have to really listen and
and you have to di—... He has to
dissect each one. Like, what are
the notes being played there,
and and what is... Like, what's
the theory? 'Cause he's actually
using music theory— ... to dissect them.
- It must be in his brain, those components
of the chords all sound different. Like-
... very clearly different.
- Yes.
- It's truly incredible. The human mind's
incredible. So you're saying, like, some
part of that is the things you hear
in the first few months of life?
- I did a thing where I played what
I call high information music.
High information music would be Bach,
Well-Tempered Clavier, fugues, yeah, any-
anything Bach.
And I would play the Well-Tempered
Clavier, and I would play... I have a,
a friend who... Turkish pianist who's
one of the greatest improvisers I've
ever heard. His name's Aydin Esen.
And I would play Aydin's
improvisations for Dylan. It had very
sophisticated harmony and linear things
in it. And Keith Jarrett, and mainly
jazz, classical, and modern
classical music. And then,
then we would play, listen to rock music once he
was born. I'm talking on my wife's stomach before
Dylan was born— ... starting at
15 weeks, for 30 minutes a night.
And then when Dylan was born, I
would sit with him for an hour
every morning and listen to music—
... and I would look at him.
In order for this for them
to... hear these phonemes
apparently and develop
this language, or get the...
The language acquisition has
to involve the social brain.
So, when kids look at you, when a baby's
looking at you, they're looking at your
mouth and they're getting social
cues from that. And this is
also another component of saying
"This is where this word stops or
starts and stops. These are
how this, the phonemes are
separated from one another. These are how
they're connected." So I believe that
all kids are born with perfect pitch
and then around nine months they begin
to lose it. If you don't engage their
social brain, making these pitches
know ... I never played pitches for Dylan
and said, "This is a C, this is a B flat-"
"... this is a G." I just played complex-
...high-information music
form. And played with him.
- And that applies maybe even more
generally to high-information language.
- Yes.
- And it starts before
they're born. I think I saw
some of these incredible
scientists that work
on the neuroscience, the
neurobiology, psychology of language
in early life. I think a big part
is you, in the mother's stomach
you're listening to the mother speak.
- Yes. That's right.
- So, like, that's how on the language side
you're picking up the language already.
- That's right. And you're picking
up the music, musical language.
So, native music fluency,
you could call it.
- So if the mother's sitting back
and listening to Bach and some
bebop jazz, you have a, you
have a pretty good chance.
- Much better chance.
- Okay. All right. So as we unwind our
way back Joe Pass and bebop. You were
You were funny enough
talking about what is bebop
jazz and, and that would be people like
Joe Pass. And in your own life, your
dad was somehow listening
to that kind of incredibly
complex and sophisticated music-
- But wasn't a musician.
- Wasn't a musician.
- Which was very weird. We
never... I have six siblings
and we could never figure out why
dad liked really sophisticated jazz.
- We just took it for granted at that time.
- Yeah, just took it for granted. And
my dad passed away in 2004 and we
never really talked about that, but he and I
used to listen to music together all the time.
We'd put on a record, I'd sit on one
side of the room, he'd sit on the
other and not say a word. Listen through
the whole side A. I'd go flip it over,
listen to side B, never say a word.
And then get up and go do stuff.
And we did that all the time.
- And so the first time you impressed your
dad was with the Joe Pass song, right?
And by the way, we'll have to go to
this song 'cause people must have
forgot 'cause right? People just think
you're like a good
communicator or something.
They don't realize how good you
are at guitar, how good you are at
actually a lot of instruments, but
guitar especially. And there's this
video. The greatest guitar solo, period.
Can you give me some
context for this particular
intricate, complicated
solo? Who's Joe Pass?
- Joe Pass was a guitarist. He lived from
1929 to 1994. And he was one of the
greatest bebop players and solo guitar
players. So he made a record that
this is off of called Virtuoso in
1973 that my dad gave me for Christmas
when I was in 10th grade. And he said ...
And this is not like my dad. My dad worked
for the railroad. He was
very, you know, few words
spoken. Born in 1919. He said, "If
you ever learn to play guitar like
this, you've accomplished
something with your life."
And I was like, "What?" So
this let, record stay, was
unopened until about March after Christmas.
And one day I was like, "Okay, I'll
open it up." And I put it
on, I start listening to it.
And I was like, "Whoa,
this is kinda cool."
And so I said, "I think I can figure out
some of this stuff." So I figured out
this thing.
- Is it by ear mostly?
- Yeah, just by ear. I didn't know
any of the chords or anything.
- If you can listen to a little bit here.
- If you go back to that Brother to Brother,
Gino Vannelli thing with Carlos Rios
playing, that stuff is incredibly hard. This,
I'm starting, I don't know any of these chords.
So I start out ... I don't even know what
that chord is, but I figured it out. I
I just, and it's weird. I
mean, look at that weird bar.
- So you're just finding like, playing
around with the, putting your fingers-
- Yes
- ... on the various positions.
- Right, but trying every combination of fingers. I
had never played that chord. That's a weird-looking
chord. And, but I kept ... I
moved my fingers around till I
heard to where it sounded like,
"Oh, that's it, definitely."
And I just looked at my hands like,
"What is that?" Had no idea what it was.
- So you were connected to the... you
were really connected to the music.
The... And so that, that's why you can hear...
It's not necessarily... Did you even, you
didn't have perfect pitch.
- No.
- You, and not even relative pitch.
- No, I did not.
No, I didn't know anything about intervals. I
didn't know anything about music theory, anything.
This is all just-
- Yeah. You're just like playing-
- Ear
- ... around with different
shapes. That's amazing.
- That's right. I mean, look at that weird
bar there. . But then you get into these
thing. So that stuff there, I
could figure out And then this.
That stuff I could figure
out. And then these things
here. Those are just inversions
of an— But I didn't know that.
I had heard Joe play that on the record. This is the last
song on there. I'd listened to it a bunch of times and
I started-
- So you just replay over and over and
over and over, and you're, like, trying
to replicate it.
- Yes. And I'm memorizing every different
chord shape. All the chord shapes that I
had never played before.
- Would you recommend people do something
like that on a really complicated song?
- Yeah, but there are so many YouTube videos that
you can go and just learn it without having
to— Yes. Yeah, I would recommend.
- I feel like the struggle-
- The struggle is where it's at.
- ... this is true for education in general.
People... Like, there's all these
educators that try to make learning easier
and more fun, and all that kind
of stuff. Great, wonderful,
but part of the thing is the struggle.
- Absolutely.
- But yeah, let's—
- I'm sorry, hearing there's.
- Let's... You're nuts.
- I heard licks like that all over this,
so I knew that that was and then
these licks here, he plays a lot of
ideas like that. That's basically a C9
chord in the top notes of it.
So all these are just inversions
of the same chord. So if I could
play that, then it's just figuring
out the single notes, okay? So...
Okay, so if you just take this
first part here when he goes
So this, this intro part is...
- You make it sound so simple when you break it
down. And, and by the way, Joe Pass, incredible
guitar player. Like, this is obvious.
- And he improvised all this. He
could have played it like this.
- But, you know, the first was the
individual notes. Look at that.
- Ooh, that's hard. Maybe just play it
like that. That sounds more realistic.
- The amount of different genres that you're
able to replicate is just incredible.
- This is just taking the needle, moving
it there, then going back a little, oh,
there. And then by the end,
the record was so scratched.
It was, but it was worth it.
When I played it for my dad-
... he couldn't believe. I mean, he didn't
say, "That's amazing." He was just like,
"Hmm, pretty good."
- So what was the role of bebop jazz in
the history of music? It seems like
it was influential in your life.
Another guy you had an incredible
interview with Flea. People should go
listen to that. Was a great conversation.
One of the things that surprised me is
just how many musical genres influenced
Flea. And the guy showed up in
a Miles Davis T-shirt. And-
- Bebop.
- And -
- Miles Davis played with Charlie Parker-
... when he was 18 years old. And that's...
He was... Charlie Parker was really his
mentor.
- Can you explain to me why, with many
of the folks you've interviewed
and in general out there, in the world of
jazz, all roads lead to Miles Davis?
Why he's such an influential figure?
- Because he was the greatest
innovator in the history of
jazz. He was at the forefront
of all these different
styles of jazz. I mean, he started
as a bebop player, and then
he, he had records like the Birth of
Cool, and modal jazz, and hard bop,
and records like Bitches Brew,
where he started to, I guess you
would call fusion. You start
to get these records. You
had two main groups of Miles
Davis. You had the Miles Davis
'50s quintet and the
Miles Davis '60s quintet.
Now, Miles made records with many people,
but the '50s quintet had John Coltrane
in it. Had, I mean, had different piano
players. Could... Wynton Kelly, but Paul
Chambers in the bass, Philly Joe Jones
on the drums. And that particular group
was made just incredibly important records.
And then he had his '60s group, which
was Herbie Hancock on the
piano, Ron Carter on the
bass, Tony Williams on the
drums, and Wayne Shorter on the
saxophone. And they made all these
incredibly important records.
- I forget who said it in an interview
with you, but they talked about like,
uh, Miles Davis his music feeling like
I think toes hanging over the
cliff or something like this.
Meaning, like, there's always a risk, there's
a danger that you're willing to make,
to fuck it all up live. And that feeling
is what creates the aliveness of the
music. Like, can you speak
to that? Just the, the
creating in the music, the
feeling like you're on the
edge. Like, you're challenging the
possibilities of what can happen,
and, and it all can go to shit, and
because of that, it feels alive.
- Well, when I interviewed Ron
Carter that played in, in Miles's
'60s quintet, I asked Ron, 'cause Ron
did records, he played bass on 2,200
recording, famous records. And
I said, "Did you guys ever
rehearse with Miles?" "No,
never." I said, "So, you,
what, what would you do?" He goes, "We'd just
show up at the studio, and he'd have the
charts, put them on the stand
and we would," "we'd just roll."
And I said, "Would you
listen to it after?" "No."
And I said, "Well, what about your, what
about the, the live records that you
did at, when you'd record at clubs and things
like that?" He goes, "We never knew that we
were recording." He goes, "Maybe I'd see
a, a microphone, a different kind of
microphone in my bass amp." He
goes, "Then months later, a record
would come out and I'd see it, and I was on it,
and I would take it down to the union and say, 'I
played on this record,' so you get paid
for it." But he said, "We didn't even know
we were recording."
So Miles was always about, you know,
don't think about it, just play.
- That's crazy. That was on purpose.
That was done on purpose.
Not to, not to do the rehearsals.
Not, none, none of that.
- Yeah, he wanted people to just feel it,
play it. Thought is the enemy of
flow, as Vinnie Colaiuta told me.
- Thought is the enemy of flow.
How do you make sense that Flea,
the bassist for the Red Hot Chili
Peppers, is influenced by bebop jazz?
- So his stepfather was a jazz bass player.
And his... When his parents
got divorced, his...
He was born in Australia,
and then they moved to New
York. Then his parents got
divorced, and his mom married his
stepfather, who was a jazz musician.
And they then used to have jam
sessions at their place, and Flea
loved it. It was kind of
like my upbringing with my
dad, playing jazz all the time. Once it
gets inside you, it's just there. And
and so he is heavily
influenced by jazz musicians.
- Yeah, his impression was just hilarious. I mean,
he's a character. His whole physical way of being is
a character. And his impression of
just upright bass is just fun, fun to
watch. His whole-
- His intensity when he picked up
his bass during the interview,
it... He's an intense guy and funny, and
you know, really um, emotional. And,
And he picks up his bass, and
there's a fierceness that you
immediately feel. And he starts,
he talks about how he practices.
And then when he starts
doing the slapping stuff, he
gets, he's so into it. And, and I'm just
sitting there going, "Whoa." Like, "Wow."
- Yeah, he talked about his practicing routine with
you. And one of the things, he's like, "I have to
practice the slap." And-
... you know, there's differences in the structure
of the different bands. But usually, like, the
bassist has a vibe to them.
I don't know if we can put words to exactly
what that is. There's a kind of energy
that drives the band.
- To me, the bass is one of the only
instruments that, when you play a bad
note, everybody notices. I started
on the bass- ... as a kid.
- Oh, interesting. But you also
played drums. You also played-
- Yeah, but my first instrument
was the cello in third grade.
- Oh.
- And then I switched to the bass in sixth
grade. And my, I majored, my undergrad
degree is in classical bass. So I
always think of myself as a bass player
first. And I always think the bass is
the most important instrument because-
- Strong words.
- ... because as much as I love
to play the guitar, and I
love to play the guitar more than
anything, I think, but the bass really
defines what the quality of the
chord is. 'Cause you can put the
root in there. You can put the third of the chord
in the bass. You can put the fifth in there.
You can play a lot of notes. And whatever
you play in the bass kinda defines what
kind of chord it is. So, the
bass player has a lot of power.
- I have to go back to our, the beginning of our
conversation. What do you think are some of the
great solos of all time? Can we
put a few into consideration?
You have a great list on top
20 rock guitar solos of all time.
- Yeah, so I put Comfortably Numb
as my favorite, as my top one.
- Yeah, on that day, right?
- On that day. Right. Now the day later, I
would have said, "It's the second solo."
- Okay.
- But I did the first solo because,
because nobody talks about that solo.
And that solo is equally
great. And when David
Gilmour... When I played
it for him, and we
talked about it in my
interview with him, it
was... Just to watch his
face when he listened to it
was incredible. I mean, I'm thinking to
myself, it's like, I'm sitting with David
Gilmour, and he's listening
to Comfortably Numb. And he's
hearing it. He's played it a million times
live, but how many times has he gone
back and listened to it on the record?
Probably not for a long time. And then
he's hearing it, and he's like, "Ooh."
- Maybe you just don't look back. When you
do great things, you don't look back.
- Miles never looked back. He never wanted
to hear the old stuff. He always moved on.
- There was this funny moment
where you made a video
why David Gilmour will never be on the
channel. And then you ended up, of course,
interviewing him twice. He's one of
the greatest guitar players of all
time. What do you think is
at the core of his genius?
- He has just an incredible
melodic sense. He knows
how phrases should be put
together. There's a flow to
his ideas that I think is just
incredible. It's the same with
Hendrix. This flow, how one idea
leads to the next, how there's space
between them. It's just like speaking.
- That's what I read about Miles Davis
is very good at understanding tempo
and the value of silence. And I think
David Gilmour doesn't always play fast.
But he does a lot with less.
And then some of that is also on the
more technical side, probably the tone
of the... I mean, he's one of the most
uniquely recognizable tones in all of music.
What do you understand about what it takes
to shape the tone that is David Gilmour?
- He has a very sophisticated setup-
... for his tone, and that was one
of the things when I went to his
studio. And I said to him, "So David, is
there anything I'm not supposed to see
here?" I mean, he never
sits down and shows-
... people his gear, and
he laughed about it.
But there I am, sitting there right
next to all these pedals that ... And
I, and I asked his tech, Phil, I said,
"These are the same ones you used on the
records?" He's like, "Yeah." His
tech has been with him for, like, 50
years. And I mean, the exact ones?
Yes. It's just, it's hard to... It's
hard to imagine that those things
still... Of course, though.
They... He's just kept it. Yeah, this
is his Binson Echorec that he played
through, and this is this.
You know, these are all the same effects
pedals. And the... Wait, is this
the same Hiwatt amp? Yeah. Is
this the same... Yes. Yeah, you
get some new stuff. But they
keep all their own gear, and that's,
uh ... I mean, he does sell his
guitars for charity. But, like, he
has a black Strat that is a, it's a
signature version. It's like
an exact copy of his old one.
So to him, it sounds exactly
the same, plays the same.
- Well, of course, they converge
towards that kind of f-...
hardware. But there's so
many tiny details over
the years. You see the final
result of it, but there's a
journey there, of exploring.
And of course, he's not...
I guess he's not doing any soft...
Like, no emulation, no amp?
- He does do emulation, actually.
He does. He has this thing,
this is... I asked him in the first
interview about this. There's a little
rack thing that I had heard that he used,
but I asked him for sure. It's called the
Zoom 9030. I put out a
short where he talks about
it. I said, "So, that,
that Zoom 9030, is that a
real thing?" 'Cause I've read about it.
He's like, "Yeah." And he talks about
how, when he's sitting
there recording on his
own... And he runs Pro Tools
himself, and so he'll be
sitting there. There's no one there to help him.
He's like, "I'll just plug into this thing, and then
I'll play a solo with this
model." It's like a kind of
'90s modeling, early modeling thing.
And he'll play a solo, and then after a
while, you hear the solo, and it's like,
"Well, I'm not gonna replay that. That sounds great."
You get used to the sound of it, and that's what it
is. So people always talked about, "Oh, well, he
couldn't have used that. He's recording through an
amp," and... 'Cause it sounds great. And,
And then he's like, "Yeah, yeah, so
that's what I use." And then I have the
video of it right there, and
it says his presets, DG1 and
DG2 and, you know, whatever.
- What's your process for preparing for
interviews like that? You've done a few
legendary people.
- I never prepare for interviews, because
I ask people things that
I'm interested in knowing.
- So, just letting your
curiosity just pull a-
- Yes
- ... pull you forward?
- And I can think of 100
questions to ask David Gilmour,
and... But I always ask my questions
based on what they say to me.
So, but I do make a playlist of
songs that I wanna talk about.
So, that kind of guides me, is
that... 'Cause I wanna make sure that
There's specific things that I need to
play to, so that you can jog his memory.
'Cause anytime you play something that
somebody recorded, even 50 years ago, they'll
remember. If they don't remember
the exact specifics, that,
that brings it to life to them again.
And they can, they can kind
of piece together some
aspects about it, and they
can really talk. He can talk
about the phrasing and the, you
know, the kind of melodic direction
of things like that.
- So, there's a lot of tiny details that go
into a particular song, whether it's in the
production or how it's played or how
it was composed, all that kind of
stuff. And you don't know
what those are ahead of time.
- No.
- You just know the song, and you just
are looking to jog their memory,
and maybe your own curiosity of like, "How
did you do this?" Or, "How do, what, this
sound or that?" You make it look easy, but
you have to have a depth of knowledge.
You're saying you don't prepare.
- I have an incredibly good memory.
- Exactly.
- That's what it is. It's that I
can remember when records came
out, who produced them, where
they recorded them, who was the
engineer, what songs are on it.
And not only that, but the people
I'm interviewing know that I
can play all the parts-
... of all the instruments, 'cause I've done
breakdowns of their songs, which is why I get the
interviews with them in
the first place, really.
- But the actual, like, the skill of
the interview, the thing you're not
saying, the preparation, is the
you young listening to bebop.
- That's right.
- It's the, it's the background
knowledge, it's the soul
carrying with you, being able to
radiate the love of the soul of music.
- I will say this, Lex, is
that the other thing is that
most of these people have a
really good sense of humor.
When I was, when... The first time I
interviewed David in New York, my brother
John came along, and he is a
massive David Gilmour fan.
That's his biggest influence
as a guitar player. And so he
said, "You're interviewing David Gilmour? Oh,
I'm coming." I was like, "All right. Come on.
Come on down." So, so my brother
John's standing about five feet
away. And John is a sales guy, but
he... Great guitar player. So John's
like... I was like, "This is John... This
is... David, this is my brother, John."
"David, great to meet you, buddy." And you
know, it sounds like it's so... He's a sales
guy. And, and so during the
interview, I said, I was like,
"Hey, John, what was I gonna ask David? Oh, ask
him about the Gilmour effect." "Oh, yeah, that's
right." And the Gilmour effect is my
thing that I say in the comments section
when people say... Anytime
anybody plays anything
technical, "Oh, yeah, that's great, but
I much prefer David Gilmour." And so I
always call it the Gilmour effect.
Anytime I have, like, Yngwie Malmsteen-
- Mm, yeah.
- Anybody that played,
that has chops that I—
... interview, the negative comments are
always, "Well, I prefer David Gilmour."
- Yeah, yeah.
- And I said that, I told David that. He's
like, "Well, maybe they should keep their
opinions to themselves."
- Yeah, a lot of these folks have really wonderful
personalities, with a, with a trusted person
to be able to reveal that personality.
So, Comfortably Numb at the top on that
day. What else is up there?
- Stairway to Heaven. Hey, Joe.
- But in that list, your top
Hendrix solo is Hey, Joe?
- It's the first guitar solo I ever learned,
so I had to put it on there. So, I don't,
necessarily do these by...
I do those in kind of how
important they are to
me and my development.
So, there's always a
biographical component to these
lists. Number three was Kid
Charlemagne, a Steely Dan solo—
Larry Carlton. Amazing solo,
extremely difficult to figure out.
Probably, there's two solos
on the list that are just
about, are very... That one I can play.
But there's a few solos that are very hard
to play. Stone in Love by Journey, by Neal
Neal Schon, is very hard
to play some licks. Um,
the, um—There's a song... There's
a solo by a guitarist, Carlos
Rios, that people don't know. It's Brother
to Brother, a Gino Vannelli song, but it's
extremely hard to play and figure out. And
that people don't know the solos. I put it on my list
'cause I knew that a lot of people were gonna watch it and
they're gonna know what this solo is.
- For me, the sentimental one, my, my
first solo is Mr. Crowley, Randy
Rhoads. I like the musicality
of Mr. Crowley, that there is a
melodic component to it. You're playing
really fast, but there's a melody to
it. And also, there's like
a legendary nature to the,
the brief time we had Randy Rhoads.
- Yes.
- It's probably one of the
greatest guitarists ever.
- '56 to '82, I think. Terrible.
Um, he was an absolute
brilliant guitarist, had his own style.
- We should say he's the guitarist
for Ozzy Osbourne, the band.
- Yeah. And that Mr. Crowley solo
is a great solo, great solo. And,
He's incredibly influential as a guitar
player too, for metal guitar players and,
um, I love Randy Rhoads.
- Uh, another guy, so one of my
favorites is Mark Knopfler.
- Yes. And I did have Mark Knopfler
on my list, Sultans of Swing.
- That's right, you did have-
- Now, I had it high on the
list, and I'll tell you why.
I would've had it lower 'cause it's one of the
early ones, 'cause I wanted people to be like,
"Okay, oh, this is a serious list."
So Rick's gonna talk about
serious stuff. So, um-
And Rick's gonna play along
with all these things.
So I wanted to kind of state that at the
beginning of the video. I mean, I made the
video in one day to do 20 solos. I think
I played 19 of them, but the Heart
solo that I had on there-
... Nancy Wilson, I played the
video of. And I tried to get
a couple of my friends to play the
Ice Cream Man, Van Halen solo.
- Yeah, it was just-
- So I called Dweezil Zappa, and I was like,
"Dweezil, can you play the Ice Cream Man
solo? I'm making a video about it." He's
like, "Oh, I'd have to practice that." Then I
called my friend Phil X who's an amazing
guitar player, and he's like, "No, I'd have to
practice that." I was like, "Come on, man,
can't let me play Ice Cream Man?" The
opening lick of Ice Cream Man that
he plays is very hard to play 'cause
it's an incredibly long stretch.
And it hurt my fingers to do, and
Eddie would turn his guitar up like
this to play. And plus, it's a tricky...
It just... It's a tricky rhythm,
and, and it's such a big stretch. It's
like, "Man, I can't... That hurts my hand."
- I just love that that's the Van
Halen solo you have. The top 20.
- See, I have to do some-
- Yeah, yeah, yeah
- ... There's so many Van Halen. My God,
it could be... There... I could pick
25 different Van Halen solos.
- But to me, I mean, there
really is nobody like
Mark Knopfler. I mean, his is unique
guitars. There's something about his
tone. Speaking of Gilmour,
there's just the tone, the care,
the timing of the notes.
His improvisation, like the live
performances of Sultans of Swing that's been
actually going like somewhat viral
around recently, his pretty old
live performance of Sultans of Swing.
For me, Brothers in Arms, these kind of-
- Great
- ... soulful, mournful type of
solos, he does really, really well.
Also, the interesting instrumentation
of Romeo and Juliet. Just so many...
Just... Truly one of the greats.
- Now, obviously the intro to
Money for Nothing is one of the
greatest. Almost impossible to recreate
that because of the sound
is so unique and his...
It's just improvised. It's so cool.
- Yeah. There's certain songs like Europa by
Santana, Santana can have that tone too.
That Mark Knopfler makes
me real- just how clean it
is. I think he beats B.B. King in my
book in terms of the cleanness of just
pure beauty of a single note.
It's like a power of a single
note. I don't know anybody
who beats Mark Knopfler.
- Well, that thing about being able to
recognize somebody from a note. You know?
- Yeah, that's-
- When I hear Brian May, I can
immediately recognize it's Brian May.
Incredibly melodic, the
tone that he has. Gilmour,
Hendrix, everyone that we're talking about,
Van Halen. It's just, they have that
one note. It's like, "Oh,
I know who that is." And
that's, that's why we're
talking about him.
- That'd be funny. That'd be a good video-
- B.B. King, you hear one note
- ... as a test of like how quickly can you
recognize just a solo starts playing-
- That's a great... I'm
gonna make that video-
- ... one note
- ... tomorrow. Lex, you'll-
- I don't know.
- The day after tomorrow, you'll see it.
- I would love to see that.
- Can you say, can you recognize
these players by one note?
- By one note.
I think it's... I think we're being a little
too aggressive with that. I think you
need like two or three or four-
- No, no, no, no
- ... or five notes.
- I guarantee you. So I was gonna do
a video last week where I was gonna
play songs in reverse, okay?
See if you can recognize these songs in
reverse. And I had my two assistants come in.
It's like, "Do you know what song that is?"
They're like, "Oh, that's Adele." Like,
"What?" Then they're like, "Oh,
that's, that's Nirvana." Instantly,
they could recognize. Like, "Well, that's not
worth me." It's like, yeah, it's so obvious.
You hear the tone of the voice backwards,
forwards, it doesn't matter. You know who it is.
- Oh, interesting. Okay.
So it's about the tone.
How could you possibly know the... from a
single note? I guess Van Halen, you can.
- One note of, of B.B. King's
vibrato, you could know.
I'm gonna... What I'll do is I
would separate the guitars. I can
actually separate the tracks,
and I'll just play one note.
- You think you could, from a single
vibrato, you can know it's B.B. King?
- Yes. Well, we'll see.
- Put it on record, I'm skeptical.
- I'm gonna do, I'll do twenty of them.
Can you recognize these guitarists from
a single note?
- Could you recognize Stevie Ray Vaughan-
- Absolutely
- ... versus Eric Clapton? All right. You
might be right. You might be right. Quick
30-second thank-you to our sponsors.
Check them out in the description. It
really is the best way to support this
podcast. Go to lexfriedman.com/sponsors.
We've got Uplift Desk, for my favorite
office desks, BetterHelp, for mental
health, LMNT, for electrolytes,
Fin, for customer
service AI agents, Shopify,
for selling stuff online,
and Perplexity, for
curiosity-driven knowledge
exploration. Choose wisely, my friends.
And now, back to my conversation with Rick
Beato. What do you think
is the best Eric Clapton
song? One of the things we haven't
mentioned so far is the importance of
lyrics and maybe meaning of the song-
... and what it represents, so
in that sense, Tears in Heaven.
- Well, the story behind
that is heartbreaking.
- And then, I personally really love
the sound of Wonderful Tonight.
- That's a great song. That's one
of my favorite Clapton songs.
- And I, as I was, like, listening to it,
just doing a whole personal
journey introspection,
knowing that I'm gonna talk to Rick Beato,
listening to just a bunch of songs, and I
learned, it's embarrassing
that I didn't know the
stories behind the music,
but I learned that Eric
Clapton was married for 10, for a decade
to the same woman that George
Harrison was married to.
And that this woman was
the muse, the inspiration
for, like, so many of the
legendary songs of rock-
... including Wonderful
Tonight, including Layla-
... and including George
Harrison's Something.
Legendary song also. The same woman. Is
she the greatest muse in rock history?
- Probably, yes.
- This is great. So in your interviews
of musicians and producers,
I think the thing you're ultimately
fascinated by is their whole, the
process, the recording,
the production, the
songwriting, the different
elements of the process. So,
Are there examples of different
things that stand out to you
from the all the interviews you've
done? And all by the way, all
the recording and production you've done
yourself. So on the recording front,
on the production front, on the
songwriting process front, just things
that pop into memory.
- When I've interviewed the guys
that are the producers, like Rick
Rubin, Daniel Lanois, Brendan
O'Brien, Butch Vig, the thing
about producers, as opposed to people
that are musicians, if you're a in a
musician, even if you're David
Gilmour, you do a record, and then you
tour, and then you do another
record, maybe years go by, but
producers are working on multiple records,
you know, sometimes at a time.
Rick Rubin could be working on
multiple records, and
the variety of things
that they do, you can talk to.
I mean, I can talk to Rick
about the Chili Peppers. I
can talk to him about Johnny
Cash. I can talk to him about
Tom Petty, and all these
records that I love, and there's
just so many interesting stories
that ... I mean, these interviews
could go on for, for days
with Rick, and the variety of records
that he worked on. And there's so
much knowledge to be gained,
for me at least, and
I think that the craft of production and
recording engineering is something that
is not well-documented. Especially
since there's so few
studios nowadays, where
there used to be a mentorship thing, where you'd
go and you'd work as an assistant engineer.
And you'd work your way up. I interviewed
a guy named Ken Scott that worked with the
Beatles. I interviewed him at Abbey
Road Studios, it's just two months
ago, and he started as a tape op when he
was 16. He started on the Hard Day's Night
record with the Beatles, and he worked
his way up, and he said the first time he
ever recorded an orchestra was he recorded
I Am the Walrus, the orchestra part.
He set up the mics, and I asked him, I said,
"So where was the band?" "Standing right
behind me." The Beatles, right behind
him. The guy I'm interviewing at Abbey
Road recorded I Am the Walrus there. I
mean, he recorded many Beatles songs, and,
and he was 18 years old, and the ...
I mean, I just can't, I can't even
fathom that. We ... They have a little
cafe in the basement of Abbey Road, and I
said, "Did the Beatles come in here?" He goes,
"Oh, yeah, they come in here and get coffee,"
and I remember when they
got two microwaves that
like the first microwaves in 1965,
and they were amazed by them, and,
It's hard to imagine that
I'm talking to people
that worked on these
historic records. But, you
know, they all start with a
blank tape or an empty hard
drive, and then, you've eventually
filled them up with this music
that you can't, you can never
imagine it not existing, like Stairway
to Heaven, or whatever it is.
- It's funny, like, looking back, even
probably for them, just to realize they've
created that magic is hard to believe.
'Cause you're looking at a blank thing and
then magic comes out, and you don't even,
you don't even understand. I you don't
understand, probably a lot of these
artists don't understand where that came
from. They're channeling some deeper thing.
- When I interviewed Brian May, he told
me, I can't even remember if this
was, if we talked about it on
camera or not, but we talked about
Bohemian Rhapsody, and at
the very end...There was a
thing where he was depressing his
whammy bar a little bit, and it
sounds like the piano is out of tune. I
never noticed it before. He mentioned
this to me. And he said it always bothered
him. And there's always something
about these songs that bothers
people. Even these songs that he-
- These old things, yeah.
- Right. There's always little things-
... and they sit and they hear it, and they're
like, "Oh, man. I wish I'd been up a little higher
on that," or whatever.
- I mean, that... there's certain
moments in songs that are just
unlike anything else. In Bohemian
Rhapsody when Freddie Mercury is,
"Sometimes wish I'd
never been born at all."
And then guitar comes in. I mean,
there's just nothing like that.
That was... That... I don't
even know. I mean, that whole
thing, you've done videos on it.
It's an incredibly complicated
composition. It's crazy that
a popular song, popular
rock song could be this operatic, so
complicated. The other thing
akin to that moment is,
Phil Collins with In the Air Tonight, the
drum bridge. Do do do do do do do do.
Yeah. What is that? I don't
understand how you can create
that. What is that? Why
is that so magical? Why
is that so singular inside
a particular song and in
rock history period? Like,
these moments, I don't know,
musically, I don't understand how you create
them 'cause it might be bigger than musical.
It might be cultural, all... a bunch of
different elements, and plus, it's him
filled with ... Like, I've seen live
performances. He has, like, a headset. He
does something. He's like a
telemarketer or something. Like,
his whole vibe and look to him, he
doesn't look like a rockstar, but he is.
- Those are hooks when you think about it,
right? It's like, it's as much of a hook
as any, as the chorus of
the song or any song. That
drum thing is something that people
wait for, and they air drum to it.
Everybody air drums to
it, and it is a hook, and
those are hard to create. Those are ...
Those moments are really hard to create,
and usually they're done by accident.
- Yes, it's hard. If you chase
it, you're not gonna get it.
In your conversation with
Sting, he said something about
how modern music is simpler, more minimalistic,
and, "The bridge is gone," I think-
... he said. And he said he thought
that, "The bridge is therapy."
It's, like, a chance for you to
reflect, I guess, on the verse-
... before the chorus comes in.
- That's right.
- It changed my view of the bridge, I suppose,
is the therapeutic nature of it, at
least lyrically. You think he's onto
something? The value of the bridge?
- The bridge is a place, I think,
where you can kind of change
the frame of reference of a song.
- You could probably do anything, I guess.
- Lennon used to... He would have
some kind of biting lyrics, like
"We Can Work It Out." So McCartney
writes the, you know, "Try to see it my
way. Do I have to keep on going until I can't
go on?" And then, but the bridge is very
Lennon. "Life is very short, and there's
no time. For fussing and fighting, my
friend. I have always thought that it's
a crime, so I'll ask you once again."
I mean, it's very, you know, very
Lennon-esque. This is... That was really
a... kind of a real collaboration
between the two of those.
- This is where different
parts of the band can clash-
... in interesting ways. I mean, the
Beatles are the epitome of that. Such ...
Like, each individual Beatle is a
great talent in their own right.
How were the Beatles able to
create some of the greatest
songs of all time all before
they turned 30 years old?
- I have never been able to figure
that out, but I have a theory
that- ... because PA-
- I have a theory.
- Because PA systems were so bad back
then- ... and the Beatles ... People
screamed so loudly that the
Beatles thought, "Okay. We
don't, we don't need... We can't tour
anymore 'cause we can't even hear ourselves,
so we're just gonna be a
studio band." And maybe
because of... We have all these
great late Beatles records, they're
from 1966 on, just because
they had bad PA systems.
And they had no monitors. You
know, they're in Shea Stadium.
People are screaming so loudly they can't hear
themselves. They're like, "Okay, forget this.
We can't tour. We'll just make studio records,"
so that's what they did, and in that one
year, like, from August 6th, 1965,
they put out Help. Then in December
3rd, they put out Rubber
Soul, of '65. Then August
5th, they put out Revolver. So within 365
days, they put out three
14, I think, 14-song
records. So they wrote and recorded three
incredibly important records. They were
in the studio. It's like working out.
They're practicing their
craft every day, writing
songs, trying to outdo the other ones, and
so you had the perfect thing
of four supremely talented
musicians, songwriters,
singers, and then the best
producer you could possibly
have, George Martin,
and it was just a perfect
storm. I think that when
I would talk to friends that would just
play in local clubs, and they'd play
four-hour sets five nights a
week, and they never lost their
voices because they're always
working those muscles.
And same with the Beatles. They were
always in the studio singing every single
day, doing takes, and I think that
that was part of it, at least.
- But you also have this theory- that
you know, that the greatest
productivity that musicians have is
before they turn 30. The
greatest, sort of, creative
genius that can come out of the human
mind musically is before the age of 30.
- Well, I think it's the same
in mathematics, as well.
You have this fluid intelligence
versus crystallized intelligence.
Fluid intelligence up until you're
about, you know, in your late 20s,
30 years old, and then crystallized,
so you're using... The crystallized is
you're using your life experience to write
things, so you'll find that composers:
Bach, Beethoven, Mozart wrote
their most important works at
the end of their lives. Beethoven, the late
string quartets, the Ninth Symphony, things like
that. So, they have a whole lifetime of
experience that lead up to this, and
there's not... They're not improvising,
but things for improvising, writing pop
songs, and that... I think when your mind
is really most active and your brain
processing speed is at its pinnacle,
that... This is just my theory-
... that people can come up with
those kind of ideas. Same with
improvising. I think that most
jazz improvisers, not all, but
most, do their best improvising
before the age of 30.
- Creating something new.
- Yes.
- Truly novel, that requires youth.
It's just a theory though, but it seems
to apply. What do you think about the
27 Club? A bunch of the
music greats died at 27.
Hendrix, Brian Jones, Jim Morrison,
Janis Joplin, Amy Winehouse.
- Kurt Cobain.
- Kurt Cobain, of course. A big part of
music history is linked to drug history.
LSD, coke, heroin, weed.
- Smoking.
- I think about this a lot. If you
go back and you watch videos, The
Beatles, any of their movies,
they're smoking all the time.
The Get Back documentary, they're
smoking constantly. Go watch any of the
MTV Unplugged, Nirvana, Kurt
Cobain is smoking every
second that he's not playing,
he's smoking. Every singer
smoked. Every musician
smoked. Nowadays, I asked
my son, Dylan, "Dylan, does anybody
smoke" at his high school. He's like-
..."Smoke? Nobody smokes." He's,
he's... The- it was an absurd
question. And that was part of culture.
- It was for everybody. I mean, that was, that was
a big transformation over the past 20 years and
just everybody stopped smoking. But I
don't think smoking has the kinda hard
negative effect that we're talking
about. I mean, I almost would
rather have them smoke than some of
the other hard drugs. Maybe smoking
distracts them from the
hard... I mean, heroin and
coke, I mean, those, those things
really, and alcohol, unfortunately-
... can be easily abused, I think. It
seems like it's a... The, the life of a
musician, this dopamine thing
of getting on stage and be
it, being adored by tens of
thousands, hundreds of thousands of
people, the high of that,
and then the comedown after
is a really hard life, for just
even neurobiologically, of like,
how do you deal with that? You
have to be able to control
the rollercoaster of your mind, and
of course drugs will be a part of
that. And you think everything
is allowed and everything is
possible. And then there's
also culture, depending on who
you hang out with, that certain
kinds of categories of drugs
are good for your creativity. And so,
naturally, you start to abuse those drugs.
I don't know. I think
the, I think it's really
interesting the role that drugs have played
in the, in the history of music. They have
certainly been extremely destructive, but
they have also certainly been productive
muses, inspirations for
some of these folks.
- Oh, absolutely. Now, would we
want to, you know, advocate people doing
things like that to boost their creativity?
- No.
- Well, I wouldn't, but just like smoking,
which I think improved people's voices-
... I mean really, the raspiness of it-
... this is the reason that
the, that so many of these,
virtually every famous singer-
... no matter what genre of music,
jazz, soul, rock, they all smoked.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Nat King Cole.
- Miles Davis too?
- Miles smoked, everybody smoked.
Miles did... Well, Miles
was a heroin addict too. I mean-
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- ... so many jazz musicians.
- Well, Miles had a sound to him.
You're right. I mean, smoking
must, must play a gigantic role to that,
adding some complexity to the voice.
- Yes.
- Yeah, some richness to the voice.
- Nat King Cole, he smoked, I think, four
packs a day. He died of lung cancer.
Lotta heavy smokers though, as singers.
Frank Sinatra, heavy smoker. McCartney
was a heavy smoker. Lennon, all
those guys smoked.
- Yeah, it's hard to know, chicken or the egg.
But I certainly wouldn't recommend doing
drugs as a way to get better at music.
But, you know, it does seem to
go hand-in-hand. And some of it
has to do with the period, with
the time period, with the place,
'cause sometimes it's part of the culture.
The drug is like you're saying, smoking.
If you were smoking now, that's gonna
be a very different experience than
smoking 10 years ago, 20 years
ago, 50 years ago. There's a
different vibe. So,
sometimes the drug is a deep
integrated part of the culture
versus an actual chemical
substance. The '60s, right?
They're... I don't know. They were on
everything in the '60s.
- Yeah.... I mean, it has to account
for something, Lex, you know?
- Uh, on the songwriting front, you
mentioned a story about Elton John
recording. So he's one of the
legendary songwriters. But
yeah. You've met him, and you know
something about the process of his, um-
- Yeah, 'cause he was recording
in a studio in Atlanta that I
was working with a band that I was producing.
And he was in, I was in Studio B, he was
in Studio A. And this
band that I was working
with, they were called Jump, Little Children. And
so, he had his assistant come in and ask, "Hey, is
this... Are you guys Jump, Little Children?"
"Yeah, yeah, yeah." And then all of a
sudden, I couldn't see out into the
live room. Elton walked into the
thing, and we were getting ready to track, and
I'm, I'm pressing the button. "Yo, where are you
guys? What's up? I thought we were gonna start
this." And no one's responding. I can hear
talking, it's like, "What, what is going on? Where
are they?" Then all of a sudden they come back in the
studio and they were stunned.
I said, "Where were you guys?"
"Elton John just walked into our session.
And he said he's a big fan. He said to
come over when we're done and,
and hang out in Studio A."
So, so we did, and he was there
with Bernie Taupin, and they
were working on a song. And he, we talked there
for, for an hour, and he was talking about
recording two records a year, and then they'd
go on tour, and they'd write and record the
whole record in two weeks.
So Bernie would give him
lyrics. Elton would go out and spend 15
minutes writing all the melody.
He'd look at his lyrics, and he was
doing that that day. Bernie was there, and
they had a lyric sheet up on the piano.
And Elton would go on, and they'd just... "Okay,
just record this." And Elton would sit there
and, and play and come up with the
song- ... in 15 minutes or so.
- Yeah, that's crazy.
- There's a great version of, I think,
Tiny Dancer, where Elton is coming
up with it on, it's on YouTube.
And he's just coming up with the
music right there. And then the band, "Okay,
here's how it goes." And they record it right
then. Then move onto the next song. I see
this. I mean, it's really incredible.
That's it. Yeah. True. There's one there that
I've sort of done the other day with Tiny
Dancer, which is about Bernie's
girlfriend. So I just sort
of ran it through and then put two
verses together, then a mid-like, then a
chorus, and then back to the sort of
verse sort of thing. It's, it's a very...
It happens very quickly. It sounds long,
but it's sort of, it sort of starts
off- << Blue jean baby, LA lady, seamstress
for the band. Pirates man, pretty
eye, you marry >>
- Okay.
- I mean, it's really amazing that he just-
- Yeah. He's looking at just the lyrics.
- Yeah, and it's one of the, he's one of
the very few people that has the lyrics
first and writes the music to it,
which to me is far more difficult.
99% of songwriters write the
music first, and then they
put the melody and lyrics to
the finished backing track.
- And maybe they write, like, lyrics, they
write, like, Nonsense words kind of-
- Yes
- ... thing. And then they figure out
from there. Yeah, that's... I mean, I
don't know what skill that
is exactly, but that's
incredible. I mean, in that
process he makes it his own.
- Yes.
- Okay. You had an amazing interview with
Kirk Hammett. I'm a huge Metallica fan.
- Same here.
- Uh, there is a lot of interesting
stuff that came out of that, from that
conversation. One is the distinction
between heavy metal and hard rock.
- Yes.
- Which is very interesting. Of course,
Metallica went through their own
evolution. They had many periods. I
mean, they've been around 40 years.
- Over 40 years, yeah. Crazy.
- The other thing is the downpicking,
which was interesting, which
is creating that really distinct sound.
- James and Kirk's, the down, the
downpicking, I used to be able to do
that. I just can't do that anymore. It
hurts my thumb-
... to, to do it. I think honestly, I thought a
lot about it. It's like, why does it, why is it so
painful? Why is it so hard? It's from
swiping with your thumb on phones.
And I think it affects that basal joint
there, and, I'm sorry- No, I'm serious.
- I love your theories.
- Well, I think that that's actually right, 'cause I'm
thinking like, "Why does that hurt so much to do that?
All the downstrokes and stuff." It's gotta be
something. It's like, yeah, it's from, from
swiping with the phone.
- The other thing that came through is
that he's an improviser at heart.
And that, I think clashes with this
kind of rigid structure that metal is.
So there's a real soulful, melodic
aspect to him. And he gave a
lot of props to James Hetfield
for just being a great
composer, being a great musician
and writer of riffs, of rhythm.
- The improvisation part of it you don't
think of 'cause they've, they, 'cause you
have the finished songs that you
listen to. But those songs are
born out of improvisations, of
jams, of little fragments of ideas.
And then they craft them
into these masterpieces.
- Also, you mentioned that... This
is weird that I didn't know, that
Hendrix was, used different
gauges of strings.
- Yeah, he was the one that
talked about that, wasn't he?
Yeah, that was really interesting. See,
these are the things that I like to
learn from these interviews with these
people. I was like, "What? Why
have I never heard of that?"
- It's like, it's one of
the ways you can find
uniqueness of sound, is by trying different
things that are not... I mean, I guess
Apple was really good at this, right?
Like, completely breaking out of what
you're supposed to do, the ways you're
supposed to do them, and doing it
completely differently. You often ask
musicians what their perfect song is. First
of all, that's an interesting question.
- What is a perfect song?
- Like, one surprise is, Hans Zimmer
said God Only Knows by the Beach Boys.
- I was surprised by that too, but I thought it
was like, "Yeah, okay, that's a perfect song for
sure." The first interview I ever
did was with Peter Frampton in
2018, and I asked him in
that interview, "What's the
perfect song?" And he said A Whiter
Shade of Pale. And I was like, "Ooh,
that's a great song."
And I then I thought,
"I'm gonna ask that to people, just to see
what they..." Now people are prepared if I ask
that.
- But it's like, they're willing
to go out on a limb and say it.
Like, if you ask me, I don't even
know. I guess you just say it,
whatever, right? Like, what would
I even say? What's a perfect
song? Yeah, I would go...
See, I feel the pressure.
- Right?
- Because the problem is, the reality is,
it changes day by day, like minute by
minute. I... Yeah, I would probably,
I'm sorry, but I would have to go Mark
Knopfler. And I would probably go...
Is it, is it really cheesy to say
the obvious thing? I would go
Sultans of Swing. Even though like I'm
tempted to say Europa, but then like...
- Sultans of Swing hits on so many levels-
... 'cause it's got a great melody, great
lyrics, and then multiple great guitar
solos. And has such a unique sound
to it. The other thing is that it
sounds very different from other Dire
Straits songs. I mean, this is like early-
... Dire Straits Strat tone. And then you
think of like Money for Nothing is a Les
Paul, and it's a totally different
kind of vibe than him playing it on
Sultans of Swing. But that song's amazing.
- Plus it, it's about music. So it's
like there's a, there's a meta
aspect to it. But then there's also like, we're
talking about this guitar stuff, but Leonard
Cohen, Hallelujah. I mean, Leonard
Cohen in general. Like these
songwriters, they go
super simple on guitar.
And there, it's just what's that called?
Singer-songwriter type. Uh, I told you off
my one of my, maybe the
music guest that's a
dream guest is Tom Waits.
I've wanted to talk to
Tom Waits for a very long time, and I've
gone through different periods of...
You've met me at a point in my life where
I've given up on it a little bit. And I
was trying-
- That's when it's gonna happen. That's-
- Okay.
- Once you give up on it, it's gonna happen.
- Yeah. Yeah.
- Why Tom Waits won't be on your podcast.
- Exactly. Exactly, dude. This is,
this is my, this is my moment.
- Tom, come, come here. Let's
do it. I wanna see it.
- I'm such a fan of, like the Zappa
artistry on the musical
front, which Tom Waits has,
but I'm a sucker for great
lyrics. Lyrics to me
is such a big part of
great songs. And, and he's
another example. He has a song
called Martha. It's about
a love story that didn't work out,
and it's an older man calling
the woman that he was in love
with, and basically reminiscing
about like, you know, thinking about
like, "What would've happened if
it worked out?" That kinda thing.
And then, you know, I loved that
song for a long time, and you know
at some point I found out that he
wrote that when he was in his early
20s. And you realize, it's similar
with the Beatles, like- ... these
guys somehow were able to
capture the human condition
so masterfully, and they're kids. This,
I don't get it. I don't understand it.
- I can't speak for Tom
Waits, but in the Beatles
case, they went to Hamburg, they
spent time on their own, they played
cover gigs that were eight
hours long, and they lived-
- Yeah, they've lived
- ... they lived life. It's not
like, not like kids today.
- Now you're on a porch. You also had an
amazing interview with Billy Corgan, of
Smashing Pumpkins. Uh, he is definitively
one of my favorite musicians.
- I love Billy.
- You asked him an interesting question
about how he creates this melancholy
feeling that permeates a lot
of his songs, and he jokingly
said that the secret is all about
the seventh and the ninth. Um,
so like, musically, chord-wise, what do
you think about that? You think he's onto
something?
- He's talking a little music theory there.
Seventh and ninth over the chord that he's playing.
So if you're playing a C chord, he's singing
a B, would be the seventh, D would be
the ninth. And he does use a lot of
those notes. But almost all these
people that we're talking...
No, all these people that we're talking
about use these notes, and this is why
their songs... When I interviewed
Sting, I called them surprise
tones, and Sting's like, "I
like the way you use the word
"surprise." Notes that are outside
the chord that are dissonant with the chords
that they're playing, but then that creates
emotion. Dissonance equals emotion. And
that's what I like. I want
music to be... to depress me.
- Yeah. What is that? I don't know. They,
the, but melancholy, and I think you
articulate it in areas, it's not actually
that depressing. There's something
about that melancholy feeling
that is somehow the other side of the coin
of happiness. It's a kind of longing.
Or there's a hopefulness to it. That aloneness that
you feel. I mean, that's actually like one of the
intimate connections you have
with music, is when you're alone.
There's, I think there's a social way of
listening to music when maybe a concert and
so on, but there's this, there's
nothing like you're alone in a car
driving, listening to,
like, whatever it is, Bruce
Springsteen. Well, I think
Louis CK has a bit about
that. And was it Bruce Springsteen?
But he's, sometimes he has to pull
over to the side of the road and just
weep, or something like this. It's just
the, there's something about that.
Sometimes a song just connects with you.
And I don't know, nothing like a
melancholy song could do that.
It... You think about, like,
maybe things you regret or how life
could've worked out. And sometimes it's not
even about, like... It's not
even real. It just connects
something to the, in the soul.
The uneasiness that we all
feel. Maybe the loneliness we all feel
that underpins so much of the human
condition, and it just connects with
that. I don't know what that is.
- There's a Kurt Cobain lyric.
It was on the In Utero record,
from the song Frances Farmer.
The chorus part is, "I miss the
comfort of being sad." And I was like,
"Yes." I miss the comfort in being
sad>> I was like, "Yeah,
that's it right there."
- In terms of love songs, I
somehow I find powerful
that kind of desperation. So like I've
always connected with Pearl Jam's Black.
- Oh, amazing.
- Like that line is... A friend of mine
was going through a breakup, so I was
listening and he, he's the one that
introduced me to Pearl Jam during that whole
period when Pearl Jam was huge
with Ten. That line is "Someday-"
- "Someday you'll have a beautiful
life. You know, someday you'll be a
star in somebody else's sky. Why, why,
why can't it be mine?" Oh my God, that—
... blows me away. That's an amazing line.
- Well, yeah, I mean-
- The delivery is incredible on it too.
- Yeah. Eddie Vedder, one of the
great frontmen of all time.
- Yes.
- And that whole period, that
whole moment in history
of Kurt Cobain and Eddie
Vedder that captured... That
was the '90s. That was
one side of the '90s that
just... This singular moment in history.
Who, who do you think are the great
frontmen in history of music?
- Freddie Mercury, Robert Plant.
- Freddie Mercury number one, probably.
- Steven Tyler.
- Jim Morrison.
- Jim Morrison?
- ...
- Yeah. Roger Daltrey. Um-
- Well, we have to say, I have to
say, we have to say James Hetfield.
- James Hetfield?
- I mean, there's nothing... I mean,
I have to talk to you about this.
I have... I mean, it's just the greatest,
I think the greatest concert of all
time. This is their historic performance
in Moscow in September
of '91. This is shortly
before the Soviet Union collapsed. Plus,
we should mention AC/DC and Pantera-
... were there too. And about
1.6 million people were
there. Now, by the way,
there's like some kind of
reporting that there was
a half a million people,
500,000 people. There's somewhere I've
seen statements like that. That's a
ridiculously inaccurate statement. So it's
a free concert, so any official counts
don't count. It's, it's
definitely over a million.
It's, it's very likely to be 1.5,
1.6 million people. And this
moment in history that I think
they channeled, it's like
whenever great music, the... Metallica
was firing on all cylinders at the
very top of their game, and they meet this
moment in history and this place in history.
There was a defining
part of the 20th century
collapsing, and you have
these people who are
for a moment through music, are
able to escape the fear, the anger
they feel, the... all of it.
There was also a political,
social, cultural moment meeting
the musical moment, and the set
list, I was just... I was li-
I listened to it several times over
the past few days, just taking myself
back into that moment in time.
Listen to this set list. Enter
Sandman, Creeping Death,
Harvester of Sorrow, Fade to
Black, Sad but True, Master
of Puppets, Seek and
Destroy, For Whom the Bell Tolls, One,
and Whiplash. Look at that. How is that-
- That's- just- That's my kind of set
- ... get the fuck out of here.
- That's-
- This is amazing. This is-
- That's my kind of set right there.
- I don't know if you can think of
anything that could beat that.
- I think that the guys in the band would say that,
too. That was... I mean, they were really at
their, at their peak. The Black
Album had just come out then, and
that must have been so, so exciting.
- I mean, Woodstock was big. There's
certain moments in time that really,
really meet the moment. Are you
a fan of live, live like big?
- I used to be, but at this point-
... I can't you know... I'd much
rather see people play in small clubs-
... and, or go to the... I'd like to listen
in the studio. Go to the studio, even.
- I generally almost entirely agree with
you. I just think that there's these
historic moments, but you don't know-
... which are gonna be which,
but you're making the concert
free, it's just all of it, you
get plus Pantera and AC/DC. The
other, which actually is a
legitimate thing you mentioned, is
as one of the greatest
concerts of all time
is Beethoven's world premiere
of Ninth Symphony. You know, I
didn't really know the personal
side of Beethoven until I
saw this movie called Immortal Beloved.
It's an excellent movie with, uh-
- Gary Oldman
- ... Gary Oldman. Just a really... it's a
masterful celebration of Beethoven in an
interesting kind of way through the
perspective of a love letter that he's
written. But then I realized like... and
this is early, this is many, many...
this is a couple decades ago now,
that, you know, he went deaf
before he even started writing the Ninth
Symphony, which is why they consider it to
be one of the greatest compositions
of all time, the greatest symphonies
of all time. He went deaf,
couldn't hear anything
before he even started writing it.
And so there's that famous story
of him in that world premiere of
having to be turned around because he
can't hear people applauding, so he has
to be turned around to see that
people are actually clapping. I mean,
there's just this whole
tragic element. Plus,
the meaning of the
symphony that ends in this
beautiful Ode to Joy, the
symphony itself is a kind
of... It starts with the
chaos and conflict and ends
with this celebration of peace and
brotherly unity and a- I guess a call
for that, a reaching for that, for
that peace. And it's a... and there's a
tragic element to it, again, connected to
history, which is it was
post Napoleonic Wars-
... and before the American Civil
War. So like, you're in this, in this
middle...... this respite from war,
calling for peace, not knowing that truly
horrific wars are coming. So you have the American
Civil War, and you have the, of course, the two
World Wars coming. So this,
all of it together, and the
fact that he's conducting deaf, and
he wrote this whole thing deaf.
I was reading a lot about his process,
and he just edits and edits and edits and
edits. So the fact that he had to
edit in his head is just insane.
- I mean, it— Beethoven was sick all the time too.
I mean, a lot of people were sick all the time.
It was very common. What
would motivate you to write
music, this beautiful music that
you can never actually hear
except for in your head? Right? Like, why...
The amount of time it takes to write,
to write a 35-minute,
40-minute piece, all the
parts, you got to hear all the
orchestration in your head. You're editing,
you're doing all these things. Where do
you get the motivation when you can't
hear the actual finished work? One,
and people would say, "Well, he's
hears in his head." But what
kind of enjoyment is it? You
wanna hear the orchestra... I mean,
it's really profound that he was
inspired to do this. There's a
thing called the Heiligenstadt
Testament that he wrote. It was
a letter to his brothers in,
from 1802. I think they found
it in his desk after Beethoven
died, and he felt a sense of shame and
humiliation because of his hearing
loss. And he said that he was
afflicted with this thing where him
of all people, that someone standing
next to him could hear a flute
that he could not hear, or
a shepherd singing in the field
that... And he could not hear
this. And, and of all the people,
why him? Where hearing played
such an important part. Another
person that would have had
to have had perfect pitch,
'cause you could never do this-
... if you didn't have perfect pitch, which I think
all of these great composers, for the most part.
Brahms didn't, from what I know, but
all the rest of them, for sure, had
perfect pitch. So they could hear these
things in their head, and that's how
they composed.
- I mean, you love sound and music.
What do you think it was like gradually
losing your hearing for Beethoven?
- It must have been terrible. I
mean, I, just... Terrible. I mean,
I've heard things where he would
have a stick in his mouth, and put
it on the soundboard of the
piano, and you could feel the
vibrations in his skull,
and things like that.
- Yeah, desperately trying to-
- Yeah. I just—
- But also, there's, what is, what
is that, that he's able to write
like one of the greatest
symphonies ever, while
deaf? So there's something about that.
We mentioned darkness, but torment
that he's going through. And ultimately,
Ode to Joy. Like, not a cynical thing—
... but a call for the positive.
- Yeah. Yeah. That's, that's— I've devoted
many, many hours thinking about that.
- And plus, Napoleon broke his heart,
because he was a supporter of Napoleon-
... because Napoleon was
supposed to represent
the French Revolution, this, this
hopeful future of no more kings,
no more monarchs, no more
authoritarian regimes. And
Napoleon ended up becoming,
essentially, king.
Uh, becoming an authoritarian.
And Beethoven, sort of
famously was critical of that. Nevertheless,
I think maintained a fascination with
Napoleon throughout his life.
But sort of a kind of more
sophisticated, complex view
of human nature and human
civilization. So becoming
more cynical. Like, seeing
more clearly that the world
disappoints you, that dreams get
shattered. And through that, is able to
still do this call for the hopeful future.
All right, so okay. So Beethoven,
one of the greats, for
sure. Like basically
everybody, I know how to
play the first movement of Moonlight
Sonata, but I always avoided the third
movement 'cause I was like,
"I'll never be good enough."
Never, never, but I need to-
- Never say never, Lex.
- One of these days, maybe. You know
what would be great? If Tom Waits
writes me an email that says,
"I only talk to people that can
play-" "... the third movement."
- Play the third movement.
- That'd be, that'd be a dream come true.
- There you go.
- I'd be like, "For this-"
- That's motivation.
- "That's my dragon," or whatever you do.
You have to have a prince and rescue the
princess. My dragon is the third
movement of Moonlight Sonata.
Okay. You often highlight the importance of
Bach. In fact, so many of your guests...
- Every famous songwriter is
influenced by Bach. They
are. The greatest composer of all time,
the greatest musician of all time.
- Even Sting and Dominic Miller said they
go to Bach even for, like, practice.
- Every day. People talk about
Bach was not known other
than in his, the places he
lived. Eisenach, he was
born in. Leipzig, he spent many
years. But Bach was known to
great musicians. It was difficult
to find manuscripts, but
there was a premier of the Saint
Matthew Passion that Mendelssohn had
done in 17, in 1829. It was on March
11th, I believe. He had a manuscript
because his father and mother
collected manuscripts.
And he got a manuscript of this piece,
and he, I think he was 20 years old,
and, and they had a performance
of it in Berlin... and Beethoven,
Mozart. They studied the Well-Tempered
Clavier, the two books of the Well-Tempered
Clavier. But Bach wrote
profoundly beautiful music, and
some of the most complex
contrapuntal music that
I don't think anyone has
ever done like that.
Extremely bright guy. Had 20 kids,
10 of them, only 10 survived
till adulthood. Lost both his
parents when he was nine, within
nine months of each other. Went
to live with an older brother.
- And extremely productive. Also.
I, yeah, I think from all
the music teachers I've ever had, I
understood the importance of studying Bach.
- He didn't write Master of Puppets,
but he wrote some great powerful-
- Well put.
- ... music.
- Well put. I tried to
educate the aforementioned
music teachers of the brilliance of
the Master of Puppets. Sometimes a
good riff is greater than
any musical composition. So—
- I agree. I go back and I
play Master of Puppets
every time I'm trying out a new
amplifier. That's my go-to.
- That's your go-to? So, like, so the
stereotypical, like, guitar store
when you come in you're
playing Master of Puppets?
- I'll play Master of Puppets. I will
play, I have to play some heavy riff—
... and so usually it will default to
some Metallica or something like that.
Or I'll play Alice in Chains, or I do
usually, like, a lot of times I'll
go and I'll do drop D
something or play Tool.
I usually would do something, do some
drop tuning thing. And it's always gotta
be some some type of metal that I'll
test to see if the, if the bottom
end's tight on the amp and stuff. So, yes.
- All right. We have to talk about this a little
bit. You made a bunch of videos about it.
There was a moment in time, it still goes
on, but there was a moment where really
people were freaking out
about the use of AI in music.
Uh, so there's these, I would
say, incredible apps like
Suno, Udio. ElevenLabs Music is also
great. They can generate basically text
to song, full song from a text prompt.
And a lot of people started freaking
out just based on how good it is.
And so you start to immediately imagine how
this is going to transform music, and you're
going to replace musicians and
all that kind of stuff. It
is legitimately nerve-wracking because these
are early versions, so you don't know where it
goes. But in your intuition now, you've
been thinking about this, you made
a bunch of videos. Now, like, being
able to reflect, "Okay, everybody
chill. Calm down."
- So if you write a prompt
in Suno and it spits out a
song, which I've done, made a bunch
of videos on this. I made up a
fake artist, Eli Mercer, in this
video. Then I did a thing for CBS
News, I made up this fake artist,
Sadie Winters, and came up
with this song, Walking Away. Well, the
computer, the program came up with it.
- There is some creativity in a process.
So in this particular thing, the
process is you generate an image.
- I did it in ChatGPT, the image.
Then I went to Claude and I wrote the lyrics,
'cause Claude's way better at lyrics-
... than Suno is. Suno's bad at
lyrics, at least right now. So I
so I did, I created the lyrics in
Claude and then I imported the
lyrics into Suno, and I
had great results with the
songs that I came up, that it came up
with. I always have to qualify that.
But then I started thinking about this. People
freak out about this, "Oh, this is bad, this is
bad." And then I thought, I was like, "No,
who are gonna be the ones that are gonna
benefit from AI?" Well, the people that are
already great songwriters, because you have to
be able to recognize when
it spits out something good
versus when it spits out
something that's not that good.
And every other song,
I've probably created
130 song ideas, out of which
there's three good ones.
- And there's a thing that's
happening where people's
ear very quickly is becoming
attuned to AI slop.
- Yes.
- And that's actually quite
fascinating. Like, for example,
One of the things, there's this
viral clip going around of an
AI-based, like a soul jazz
remix of songs like 50
50 Cent's Many Men, and I think it is
super impressive. And there's a different
pipeline actually.
- Yes.
- It's a tricky pipeline to how to pull
that off, and I think a lot of the
creativity in that, even
that kind of remixing, is
in the pipeline of how
you actually do that,
because there's actually a lot of
manual stuff in that pipeline. Uh,
but I think ironically it's
very cool at first, but when
you listen to it for a while you
understand that this is AI slop.
- Yes.
- For a soul remix, it actually
lacks soul. But it made me think of,
like, when I listen to soul or blues,
I think I really want, in that case,
to know... I don't want an AI B.B.
King, I want the real B.B. King. And,
and I, if I know, if any AI is involved
in the B.B. King process, I'm tuning out.
- Yes.
- And the, I don't think I'm
being curmudgeonly old dude
in that. I think we
humans want authenticity.
- So when AI, when I first started making
these AI videos, it started back
in 2023, I made my first one, and
I would take my phone, come
up in the kitchen, I'd play a
song, and then my youngest
and Dylan... My youngest,
Layla, and I have three kids, and
my oldest, Dylan, as soon as I
played it, "Why are you listening
to AI?" And it's like, oh my God,
instantly. It's like, how do you
know? Oh, it has this ringing sound
in the thing. So it took me probably
about four or five days to figure out,
"Okay, what are they hearing that I'm
not hearing?" So I did it, I separated
all the parts, and what
they're hearing was the
artifacts that are in the
vocal reverb. That sound- that
were... That made incomplete-
It just couldn't do the ambiances
correctly, right? Because it's trained
on... A lot of these AI programs
are trained on very low
bitrate MP3s, right?
So, they feed all this
stuff in there. So, they're getting
really inferior information on the
in the training process, whereas now
when they make these deals with the
major labels, they'll get the
multitracks, and they'll get high-quality
WAV files to train from,
right? And whoever opts
in, they get the solo vocal tracks. You
know, if Ed Sheeran wants to do it,
or Drake, or whoever wants to give their voice
to it, let it do its thing, and then get the
royalties from it.
I'm not saying that any of them are doing
it. I'm just giving an example. But
every time that I would do it, I could be down
the hall, and I would play something in my phone
just to see if they'll be like, "Why are you
listening to AI?" They can instantly tell.
Then it eventually started getting
better. And then- and then, it'd be like,
"Is this AI?" I'd be in the car with
Layla coming back from taekwondo
practice, and she's like, "Is
this AI? Why? Does it sound like
AI? Sounds like it could be AI." And
I'd be like, "Yeah, it's AI." She's
like, "Oh, it's getting better."
And then I did this song for... It
was an NPR interview, and I created
a song with a fake artist.
And the song was called Neon
Ghosts, and I played it for
Layla in the car. She's
like, "Can you separate the
tracks?" I said, "Yeah, I have them
separated back home." "Okay, I want to go down
to hear it." So, we go down to the studio,
and I play it for her, and she listens
to the soloed vocal. She said,
"Wow, this is really realistic."
"This is very hard to tell,
even with the soloed vocal."
- I think the room for creativity
right now for humans is lyrics.
It seems like the lyrics that are being
generated, they lack soul somehow.
- Yes.
- And that's- I don't know
the words correctly.
I mean, they can be incredibly sophisticated,
but there's so- something, the
edge is not there. Some
kind of edge that you-
we want in our lyrics. Some kind of
surprise, but not cringe or not cliché. Or
something truly novel in the lyrics.
But that- if that's the
case, it's kind of sad that
that's where the creativity has to
come from, but not from the music.
Because then if we can
create very realistic
music that sounds really damn good,
where's the role of the musician there?
- I think the role of the
musician is that in
actually... If they use AI to assist them
in coming up with ideas, they could as
a creation tool. Then the musician...
Like, some of the stuff is just not
high quality sonically, high quality.
So, the musician goes in and
redoes stuff and changes
things and adds parts, and then
they actually do music production,
and maybe they re-sing the parts, and they
change the stuff. And then then it's just
basically like an idea generator, and
I think that that's a great use of
AI, is for that.
- But see, if you do that,
does it make you sad that you don't
necessarily need to learn instruments?
So, basically, you can... I mean,
you can think of it as a different
kind of instrument, but
you can write lyrics.
You can hum the melody.
You can just hum parts.
You know? And then and then do
A, B kind of thing. Just kind of
rhythm this kind of, and stitch them
together. And never actually have
your fingers on a guitar or-
or fingers on a drumstick.
- That's why I'm not gonna use AI,
Lex, is for that reason, because
to me, it's just boring. And I-
- Yeah, it is
- ... when I use it, it's just
like, "Eh." But I used it for
about a month or so, just
because I was making videos.
And I was trying to see how it's advancing.
Every- every three or four months, I'll-
I'll sit down, and I'll see
whatever new versions they have.
And I'll write some songs. Write
some songs. I'll prompt some songs
and see what they come up with and see
if they're improving on the things. But
ultimately, I don't find
it interesting to- to use.
- I hear you. You're a bit old school.
- I'm old school.
- As am I. I'm trying to think
about the future, and I think
it's still, even in the future, also going
to be boring. I think there's something-
- I agree
- ... fundamentally boring about it, and I've been
trying to figure it out. For- so for example,
I use it a lot for- more and more
and more for programming. So, for
building stuff. And there, it's
not about the... The final
output is not the code. The output is
what the code creates. And there, it's
extremely useful, not... It doesn't matter if
it's boring or not, it's useful. But when the
final output is the thing that AI
creates, which it would be in- in
music, then there's something
about us that just, like...
We know. We- there is
something boring about it.
- Yes.
- We want to celebrate and see the
thing that's hard to create. And
if AI can just text a
song, "Generate a top 10
hit," we- we- we'll quickly lose value
for that, I think. And so, we'll want
raw, like raw. Whatever-
whatever shape that
raw takes, I want to say
raw talent, but that raw
talent of any kind. And per-
perhaps... It would make me a little
bit sad, but that's also
awesome. Perhaps the
new kind of raw talent that civilization
is asking for is how to make great
TikToks. Maybe that's what
raw talent looks like.
It makes me a little bit sad because
I'm a huge fan of long-form.
Uh, but that also... Creating
TikToks is also talent.
- It's a- it is a talent. Absolutely.
When I see anything that's AI
generated, I instantly recognize it.
Any video, I'm like, "Ugh, boring,
boring, boring." And my kids do the same
thing. They just have no interest in
engaging with it. As soon as they recognize
it, and they can spot it a mile away-
... and they're just like boring,
boring, boring, boring, boring.
And then they kind of dis- then they
don't even wanna engage with the
social media platforms,
which is a danger. Which
I think they need to crack down on the AI
slop. YouTube's done a pretty good job
on it, but it's hard to stay on this. It's
it gets flooded with so much
of this stuff, it's so easy to
create and put up there.
And to just be in the,
In the whack-a-mole thing where you're
just trying to get rid of it all is a-
- Yeah, it's fundamentally like, it's
fundamentally boring. I think boring is a really
good-
- Yes, boring.
- And it's, and it's annoying to
have to flip through the AI slop.
But I think actually, as a civilization,
it's just inspiring for authenticity
'cause you wanna be real. And being
raw, which I, you know, one of
the things I like about podcasts is
people just shooting shit and just being
themselves in, in the long form
versus overproduced. 'Cause I
think AI is making people realize that
AI is good at being overproduced.
So there'll be more.
- Let's get that covered.
- Yeah. Even artists, 'cause you're saying
like, yeah, they'll use it as tools. Part of
me thinks like not really. Like,
I think they'll quickly, this
kind of process of generating
a bunch of different options,
And choosing the one you like
the most, I think is a really
frustrating process for
artists. And it, I think it, I
think AI will definitely be used extremely
effectively as a very fine-grained
tool in the image domain, it's
editing images. But not like
macro editing, but very specific
kinda editing that Photoshop
is increasingly integrated in. Uh,
I'll mention to you offline, so the
whole uh, iZotope RX group of software
that does a lot of the de-noising,
All the D, removing the wind, all
the, they integrate machine learning
extremely effectively-
... for working with audio in different kinds
of ways. There's a bunch of different other
programs that do that. Maybe
for like B-roll footage
and a, same thing on the audio, if
you just need a little audio to
create a feeling of a
scene, the AI might be used
there in that kinda way. But
truly original stuff, eh.
- I've saved videos where I'm
doing, speaking over music, for
example, in an interview. Somebody's
playing and, and we have two
dialogue- two people speaking in
lavs, but it's, but there's so much
bleed coming from the person playing-
... that you can't hear what we're saying.
And then we'll split out the voice for that
section, the two voices, separate them-
... and then take the music and separate
that stuff in. So it's really helpful for
things like that.
- And now, once again, quick 30-second
thank you to our sponsors. Check them
out in the description. It really is the
best way to support this podcast. Go
to lexfridman.com/sponsors. We
got UPLIFT Desk for my favorite
office desks, BetterHelp for mental
health, Element for electrolytes,
Fin for customer service AI
agents, Shopify for
selling stuff online, and
Perplexity for curiosity-driven knowledge
exploration. Choose wisely, my friends. And
now, back to my conversation
with Rick Beato. So
you have this video breaking down
Sabrina Carpenter's song Manchild.
And you use that as an example of
building up people's intuition
about the music business
and how the music production for these
popular songs is being done these
days. Who's doing the songwriting,
how's it being done and all that kind
of stuff. I was wondering if you could
speak to that.
- In that particular song, Jack
Antonoff, who is one of the writers,
Amy Allen, Sabrina Carpenter, said
in some awards thing that there's an
old guy on YouTube that
says that Sabrina had very
little to do with the song.
And so he said in this clip-
- You being the old guy.
- Me being the old guy. That, well,
Sabrina really was the—she's
amazing and she's the one that wrote
everything in the song. It's like, so
my response is like, "Well, why are you guys
even included on the songwriting then?"
- So one of the things you highlight is
a lot of people are included on the
list of songwriters.
- Yeah, 10 people- ... 11 people. I mean,
you know. Like, why does Song of the
Year have songs that are
interpolations, meaning that they
have melodies from other songs
in their interpolation? They
used to call it stealing. And then you
have songs that used samples for the
whole thing. Like the Doechii song that's
out right now. And I said,
"Look, she took a Gotye song and
basically took off his melody and
she created her own melody over
it." It's like, well, it's, I mean, it saves
time for her. You don't have to actually create
a track, you just can sing over someone
else's song that was already successful.
- Yeah, you pointing that out, the
song Anxiety, it broke my brain.
- I mean, it's so absurd.
- It, yeah, it just feels
unfair. It feels, it's a good
song, but it was also a good
song before, and it was,
before that, it was also a good song.
- Right, 2011, or Luiz Bonfá in 1967. So
why is that considered to
be in the top songs of
the year? It's like, come on, you can't
find another song that's not based on
that? That's ridiculous. And Doechii has
some really good songs- ... on her record.
- Yeah, but why are these the ones
that are coming to the top, right?
- Well, you know.
- This is interesting. Hey, that might
be just a criticism of the machinery
of the business-
- Absolutely
- ... that drives them. It's
not necessarily, like, a
lot of these folks are
really good musicians.
First of all, I think a lot of them are
also good, like the actual songs they
make at the top are good.
I'm a big fan of Bruno
Mars. He's a great songwriter....
and is a great musician all around.
- Absolutely.
- You know, is a Michael Jackson,
eh, reincarnated. I mean, he's-
- Super, super talented guy.
- Incredible, right?
- Yes.
- Um, you mentioned Billie Eilish and
her brother write a lot of the songs.
- So good. Yeah, super talented.
- I mean, Taylor Swift is unlike anything. I
mean, that's a historic figure in music,
but she's a fundamentally, at least
originally, a singer-songwriter.
- Yes.
- So that's a, I mean, that, I mean,
I'm sorry, but that, that is a, like,
of the kind of music that Rick Beato
gives props to. She's the, she carries
the flame forward.
- She works on her own songs, absolutely,
and she, but she never has more than
two co-writers on things.
- Wanna take a quick bathroom break?
Okay. I have to ask you about this
complexity that you're facing on a
basically daily basis. I think
it's a challenge a lot of
YouTube folks experience, but you're
just so viscerally experiencing
it because a lot of what you do in
your channel is celebrate music,
broadly. And so, as part of that
process, you have to sometimes show
clips of music, and I think all of
that falls under fair use, quite
obviously. And so you get
all these YouTube copyright
claims, and for folks who
don't know, if you get three,
three of those, it's each one
of those can be a strike on the
channel and could take down your
channel. And you get some insane
amount. You said you got, like
I think I had a similar thing
on my Rick Rubin episode,
like, I think you said 13.
13. So, what, can you just speak to this
whole thing? You've been in a constant
battle, WMG, UMG, all the, all, all-
- All the, all the three-letter name-
- All the-
- ... record labels, right?
- The, the music business people,
so, what, what's the story there?
- Well, this has been going on since the
beginning of my channel, and I've made videos
periodically. When I first
started, it was just instant
blocks, so you never knew back in,
I started, it'll be 10 years in
June. So, when I'd play music
in a video, YouTubers were not
playing music in videos because they
didn't, because of the Content ID things
and the take-downs and stuff. So,
I would play music, and I'd just see
what happens, and then you get a content
ID claim, or you— or you
realize the people were, quote,
unquote, "blockers," and I came up with
that term that they would block your video,
take down your video. And I
realized at first it was,
like, anything Guns N' Roses, which
is still the case, Guns N' Roses,
AC/DC, I mean, many bands, Fleetwood
Mac, um, Led Zeppelin, and then,
and then something happened.
There was a guy on the
skateboard on TikTok that had the ocean
spray thing and, and he was listening to-
... Dreams by Fleetwood Mac.
And that blew up and became a number
one song again. And the labels then
realized, I mean, I'd
made many videos about,
about why this is wrong, and it should be fair
use and everything. Well, because of that,
the label's like, "Ooh, maybe we should
rethink this." And then they just started
demonetizing videos.
- Demonetized means they get
all the money that you make.
- They get all the money. In a one-hour
video, if they, if you use 20 seconds
of a clip- ... they get all the money.
Okay? So, I hired a lawyer
finally after the Rick Rubin
video, 'cause I thought it
was ridiculous. I go over to,
to Tuscany, I interview
Rick at his house, and
I hired a— hired a lawyer to fight this, who I'm
gonna have on my channel. I don't wanna say who
it is, but he's another YouTuber.
And he had approached me a couple years
ago, and and it's not cheap to do.
- Oh, you, you're gonna do, like,
a public interview with him?
- I'm gonna do an interview-
... with him, yes.
- Awesome. Okay.
- I talked to him today about it, actually.
- I can't wait. That'd be great.
- So he said, "You should fight these
'cause every single one of them
is fair use." And he
went through my entire
catalog. I have 2,100 videos, and he's
fought 4,000 Content ID claims and
won every single one of them.
4,000. That's a lot— I mean, when I
do top 20 guitar solos, there's 20
Content ID claims, you know?
It's, and it's either, it
can be either from the sound recording,
if I used that, or if I just play
it, it can be from the publisher.
- That's amazing. So is there, I mean, that's-
it's still, he's still a lawyer, still
work. Does that, is there a hopeful
thing you can say about the future of-
- Yeah, fight these Content ID claims.
If it's fair use, if you're not
just playing the song and listening to it,
and, 'cause a lot of stuff that are reaction
videos, or whatever, that are not, where they
play the whole song, I mean, I'm using these
things, and I'm talking, lot of the
times it's in interviews, or it's
in, I'm breaking down
a solo, and there's a-
- Yeah. See, that's an-
- ... you know
- ... obvious one, but even reaction
videos, right? Where those-
- Yeah. Even reaction
videos, yes, absolutely.
- Uh those are more borderline. But
I don't know. I love those videos.
- Absolutely.
- Like, when a person's just sitting there and listening
to it, and they're like, you know, like, a, like,
a voice teacher is listening to
a vocal performance, and like-
- Yeah, but those are breakdowns.
- Yeah, those are breakdowns, yeah.
- I think that the Content ID stuff
that was happening with these major
labels, they would hire third parties-
... that would go out, use AI, and go and
anytime they detect anything, they always go to the
biggest channels first to get the most views, makes
sense and stuff.
- Yeah. Yeah.
- And, and they would claim everything that
they could, and historically, YouTubers never
would fight back. They were
like, "Oh, this is easy money."
YouTubers never fight back and, at these
things, because they're afraid to
have their channels taken down. So-
- Right, you gotta say, "Hold my beer."
- There you go.
- So, I mean, it's important. So, you-
- I mean, it took me years though, Lex. I
didn't... I've been doing this... So, I've been
doing it for one year now, and I'm
nine year- almost 10 years into my
channel. So, it took me that long.
- I mean, hopefully, there's a
ripple effect also. It's not just
your situation. Hopefully, you don't
have to deal with this for much longer.
Um, how has Spotify changed music?
Sometimes we highlight the fact
that they changed the nature of
music and that it's the scarcity is
not there. But also, a
lot of it's like every
kind of music is available and so fast
and it's so easy. It's easy to explore.
- It's a commodity. It's like
turning on a water faucet.
- Do you think-
- Once you get going-
- ... that there's some good to... I mean,
there's a lot of good to that, right?
Uh, well, have you... Did you go through
that whole pro- I still remember
where I had to basically
throw away the albums.
- I never did that. When, after you
uploaded them into your computer?
- Yeah. So, there's that
two-step process. One, there's
like the hard albums, CDs for me.
And then, and then you upload
them into your computer.
And you save them. And then
you, how do you put it?
Allegedly, a friend of yours
pirates some extra songs.
And puts them on the computer.
So, you have your stash on the
computer. You're like,
"This is my finely selected
stash of greatness." Uh, sometimes
organized by album, sometimes
not. And the big moment for me that was
really difficult to do, really difficult
to do, is throw away that stash.
Bec- and switch to Spotify.
Switch to streaming, and
basically, rebuild the stash of
playlists and all this kind of stuff.
And that, it was heartbreaking
'cause so much love and effort
went into that. Both the
CD, the stashing of the CD, and the
stashing of the MP3s in
the computer. And then in
Spotify, it just seems
just effortless. But
it helped me discover all kinds of artists
I never would have discovered otherwise.
And Pandora, I used a lot. Pandora
is more uh, prioritizing on the
discovery part versus organization
part. And that was really wonderful.
- So, one of the things I... I'll start with
a positive that I like about Spotify, is
that they show view count, they show
play counts. Whether they're real
or not, that's another question.
But they show how many
plays songs have, and that's
how the charts are based.
- Does that give you signal that something
is listened to a billion times? Does that
mean something to you?
- Yeah. It means that, that it's a popular song.
Well, that's a massive hit. There's very few
songs that have a billion,
billion plays. Now, the
downside of Spotify is the way that they
pay their artists. Now they've lumped in
podcasts with that are getting a cut of
this streaming with the music. Um, and
you know, the search and discovery.
I mean, there's benefits of
algorithms and there's negative things
of algorithms. Algorithms happen to
kind of a lot, many times,
pigeonhole people into
listening to the same genre of music
all the time, and not expanding their,
you know, the discovery
of new music. Where
that you might hear on the radio back
in the day where program directors
would play things that they liked, right? And you
might hear something, "Oh, what is that?" "Oh,
that's a new Soundgarden record,"
or so- you know, like, "Whoa, I
like that. I'm gonna go by- check that out." You
know, something you might not have heard or something
odd.
- Like, one thing I really love doing
on Spotify is you can have radio.
Meaning, like, you have a few... It's
similar to Pandora, like you can...
Okay, this is gonna reveal a little
too much about myself. But usually
when I go work out, I'll listen to something
like Rage Against the Machine radio.
I'm sorry, I need-
- What else would you listen to?
- I need motivation. Classical
music? I don't know.
But yeah, it's pretty good 'cause it recommends
a bunch of other stuff I wouldn't even
know. Some of it I know,
obviously, but akin to
the, similar to the Rage Against
the Machine-y type thing.
It recommends a bunch of artists, and it's like,
"Oh, holy shit, that's awesome." So, I don't
know. That discovery works really
well. So, some of it is the technology
thing. Um, but that experience
was fundamentally more
vibrant than I had previously
with my stash. That I would just
keep a stash, and I would listen to the same
record over and over and over and over.
But yeah, this, what's lost is the
I'm sure you love this, but
listening through the Led
Zeppelin records, just driving
in a car and listening to the
whole thing all the way
through. Yeah, that's lost.
- So, I have my old iTunes
libraries from 2005-
- Oh, nice
- ... that I list- that I, that I've saved.
The CDs that I uploaded into my computer.
Anytime I play songs on my... When I'm
doing interview, I always play WAV
files, I put them in. And it's
funny that when I interview a
mixer, I interviewed this
mixing engineer, Andy Wallace,
and people comment, "Wow,
that song sounded amazing."
song sounded amazing." And you go, "Well,
not only are they great mixes that he did,
but I'm using WAV files in
there." And people notice
the, and these are WAV files from,
from, you know, original encoding. Not
remastered things that Spotify keeps doing-
... and adding a bunch more top end and
things like that. That these are the-
- Oh, I see
- ... these are actually the
original WAV files from
off the CD that I ripped-... 20 years ago.
- What's your current... And people are really
curious about that, so what's your current
stack? What are the tools you use? What's
your DAW? What's the audio interface? What
are the mics?
- So I use Pro Tools.
- Pro Tools stuff.
- For the most part, but I also use Logic-
... And Ableton. I've got
all, I've got all those.
- So you're mostly on a Mac?
- I'm only on a Mac.
- Only on a Mac.
- I'm only the opposite.
- Although we have multiple
PCs, 'cause my kids use PCs.
- Yeah, just to rebel.
- They do it for gaming. They like to game.
- Right, that's true. I, but like in terms
of editing, I hate how how good Mac is-
- So good
- ... at just integrating. The hardware and
the software just work well together.
Both on the video en-
- If I didn't have a Mac on, honestly,
I wouldn't be talking to you right
now. Because I got a G3 that's...
So the only good thing that a
major label did for me is
when, when my band was on
UMG and they bought me
a G3 and an SM7 and Pro
Tools Digi 001, the
first prosumer Pro Tools
thing. And I learned how to use
Pro Tools, and that allowed me to
learn how to edit video and
become a record producer.
So I gotta give it, give
it to Mac for that.
- So Pro Tools, I mean,
that's still the standard.
- That's kinda the industry standard, yeah.
- I gotta ask you 'cause I know...
I've never used Pro Tools. I've
used... Again, I'm a caveman. I've
used REAPER, I've used Studio One, that's
the most recent that I've used that. And-
... for the most time I've used
Ableton Live. I feel like I'm
using 1% of the power of the tool.
Like, Ableton Live makes me feel like I'm
literally just pressing the record button.
- Ableton's amazing. It really is.
- It is. But I feel like the... It, I
mean, it's designed for people that are
doing like all kinds of MIDI
stuff, and like looping
and the, what is it? The push buttons with
the, with the beats. And the,
it's, it's... I mean, I sound, I
sound really out of touch. But
it's just the power is incredible.
Also, it's, I think it's not just for
recording, it's also for live performances.
So this is why Studio One has been a
little bit nicer for me, because it's
simpler, made for recording more so.
- Any DAW that you get used to, Lex, that's-
- Just use anything.
- ... using it, yeah. And-
... you have to become a master at the things.
If you wanna be a recording engineer or
producer, you, you become an expert. A lot
of the... You know, Finneas and Billie
Eilish, I think that they use Logic, that's
their DAW that they like to use. And
Logic, you know, a lot of pros
use Logic. You know, I fire up
Logic every couple days and I
use it for things. I have it on
my laptop here and I have Pro Tools
and Logic on my laptop. I use
both. I use Pro Tools mostly though.
- But Pro Tools, that's where
you feel like at home?
- Oh, yeah. I'm an expert in Pro Tools.
- Are you using any emulation? Any
amp sims or it's all real amps?
- No, I use amp sims. On my laptop
here when I travel and things like
that, I use Neural DSP, which I just did a
video at their headquarters in Helsinki.
And their CEO, Doug Castro,
is a friend of mine.
I actually talked to him today as a
matter of fact. And I have a Kemper
amp sim, you know, a modeler. I have an
Axe-Fx, I've got a Helix, I
pretty much have all these
things. But for me, I can...
I have 100 amps in my
studio, so... And I have mics set up
all the time, and cabinets, and stuff.
- Oh, what do you mean?
- I have 100 amplifiers. Real amplifiers.
- Real? Wait, sorry, 100?
- I have 100, yeah. About 100, maybe 95.
- How does one go get to that level?
- Collecting and being...
I'll be 64 in April, so-
- So you just don't let go?
- I don't let go, no.
- Why would you get to 100? Like is
it, is it tone difference, the-
- Yes, so everything-
- You know the tone difference?
- ... does one thing really well. And
so it'd be like, okay, so I have this
Marshall JCM800 that's
modded that does this
one thing. It's got great mids and it's
good for this kind of a tune, so I
will pull that out. Then it's like, no, I
need more of like a scooped metal sound
that's more like Metallica or Dream Theater
or something, so, oh, I'm gonna pull
out my Mesa Boogie. Or I need something
that's chimey that's more like Brian May or
like The Edge, I'm gonna pull out
my Vox AC30. So everything and, and
that's, that's why I have so many
amps, because they all do... Every
amp I have does one thing really well.
If it doesn't do it well, I get rid of
it. And I'm down to 100.
- Down to 100. It's only 100. Uh, but it-
- I can get by with probably 75.
- Come on, but you, then you're really running
the risk of not having just the right
amps. But you're using
emulation, so that's great. I
mean, and that... But there's the
other side of it which is the guitar.
I told you offline, I think having
multiple guitars is cheating, but
whatever. No, nobody agrees with me on
this. I only have like one... I do have
some side pieces but one
main... The greatest gi-
- The Strat? What do you play?
- The Strat, yeah.
- American Strat. I said I would never
do this, but I was in a guitar store.
I live next to a guitar
store in Cambridge,
and one day... I would always stop by, I
don't know why. I just, just to look at the
guitars, like, and I don't
really know why exactly, just to
be in the aura of these
great instruments. And I—
they brought in this American
Strat that had these
different shades of...
It was like a silver.
And I just... I've never had
this feeling. They talk about
love at first sight. I
just fell in love with the
guitar. Can you just speak to the kind
of guitars you have and you love?
- I pretty much have... mainly old
school guitars, right? So I have
Gibsons, I have Fenders, I have PRS
guitars. And then I have... I have
two Gibson acoustics.
I have a 1957 Country
Western that I've had for probably 30
some odd years. It's a great guitar.
And I have a J-45 Gibson,
and I have a Martin
D-28. So I only have three
nice acoustics. And I have a
Guild 12-string, and I have a Guild
Nashville-tuned guitars. The low
strings are up, up the octave, so
the E, A, and D and G are up the
octave. That's Nashville tuning.
Six-string though. Like, basically what
David Gilmour plays on Comfortably
Numb in my video. He plays a
Nashville tuning, but with one
variation. The low E is up two octaves. So
he demonstrates actually
the... And this is how he
wrote Comfortably Numb. The chorus—
... part of it was with this particular
guitar that he's playing in the video.
- What can you say about, like,
the different feels that the
guitars, the acoustics have? Like, what,
how do you know which one to pull out?
- It depends on the kind of part that I'm
playing. If I want something with really
tight mid-range, that
doesn't have a lot of low
bass, this particular old
Gibson that I have, the
57, I will pull that out.
It's got very balanced
strings and like, you know, mid-range. It
doesn't have a lot, it doesn't have a booming
bottom end, booming low E string-
... or anything or A string.
So it depends on what,
what kind of sound I'm
looking for. If I'm-
- So it's more about sound versus feel?
- Yeah. All my guitars play equally well.
I have them all set up
to where they play well.
Um, I have a signature Gibson guitar
that I've had for five years now.
- When you say Gibson, Gibson Les Paul?
- Gibson. It's a double cut Les Paul
Special. Yeah, with P-90 pickups.
- I don't know what double cut
means, but it sounds impressive.
- That means two cut, cut. Two, um-
As opposed to a Les Paul that has one
cut. So it's a Les Paul Special that has
two. I have it over there.
My signature guitar.
- That's the- That's the... All right, nice.
- Yeah. When you play this, you're gonna
be like, "Oh my God, this is butter."
- Now, I'm again, I said
it's cheating. I don't-
- And what amp do you play through?
Do you play through an amp sim, or do
you have... What do you have, like a-
- This is gonna be embar... Yeah.
I use BIAS FX. I'm sorry.
- Lex, I use amp sims too,
so... I just got the new John
Mayer Neural DSP plugin today
that I have not tried out.
He did a modeling of all
his amplifiers that, that-
... that Neural DSP did. And it
sounds great. John played it, it
sounds just like his amps.
- Yeah, John is incredible.
- John's great.
- I've been fortunate enough
to have dinner with him two
times. And outside of being an incredible
musician, he's also conversationally just-
- Yes. I've known John since
he lived in Atlanta but,
when he got signed, and I knew John from
way back then, right in the early 2000s.
- I think he doesn't get enough credit.
Like, he's one of the greatest living
guitarists-
- He's a fantastic guitar player
- ... in the world.
- Absolutely.
- And a celebrator, if that's a
word, of great guitar playing.
- Absolutely.
- By way of advice, you started your YouTube
channel in your mid-50s
and found incredible
success. You've had essentially multiple
careers. Is there some wisdom
you can extract from that?
- So my theory is that
somebody's gotta be successful, so why
can't it be you? That was, that was...
That's, that was my... When I started my channel,
I mean, I didn't start it to... It started by
accident with the Dylan video.
And and really, so many people
reached out to me. I started it
six months after that viral video.
So many people wrote to me, "Can
you teach me this?" Pro musicians,
well-known ones that you would,
who you'd know. "Can you teach me
this?" I can't teach you
what Dylan did, but I
can, I can teach you relative
pitch, develop your ear that
way. But then that, I had
conservatories writing
to me about this stuff from all
over the world. "How did you teach
Dylan this?" 'Cause we made about four
different videos, and they got more and more
sophisticated. And so
I thought, "Okay, I'll
make some YouTube videos and explain this
stuff." This is, that's really why I started, so
I didn't have to keep... I couldn't answer the
emails. There were so many of them, so I just started
making videos on how to train your ear
and music theory. And that's really
how I started my channel, and my wife was
like, "What are you doing?" I said, "I'm
making YouTube videos." "Why?"
So I don't have to keep
telling people how I did this stuff.
And then all of a sudden, you
know, few, I had 4,000 subscribers
the first month, another
4,000 then. Hit 100,000 after
a year, and then six months
later, 200,000, then three
months later, 300,000. So-
- I think there, one thing
that should be said,
that in modern culture for young people,
a lot of them will see YouTube and
TikTok and Instagram,
and they kinda wanna be famous.
They wanna get the clicks and the
views and so on, and that's the thing
they chase and optimize. I think
the thing that you're leaving unstated
perhaps is that you spent many years
pursuing the mastery of a craft.
And there's a lot of value
to getting good at something.
- Absolutely.
- Offline. You can actually
reveal your journey
online, but the thing you're chasing
is not Fame. It's getting good at
something. And I think actually
what happens is even if the
thing you get good at-...
is not the thing that
you become famous for if that's
the thing you're that ends up
happening. It's still, like,
getting good at one thing, kind of
somehow relates to getting good at another
thing. Somehow they'll lead you to get
better at getting better at the next thing,
at the next thing, and the next thing.
But if you're just chasing fame and trying
to figure out, "How do I do the viral
thing?" Or so on, it just seems to...
You might actually get there, but
it'll be unfulfilling
and not long- lasting.
- My theory of my channel has always
been, make videos on things
I'm interested in. And
at first, I thought, "Oh, nobody's going to
watch an old white-haired guy on YouTube."
That was kind of my thing. Well,
that was not correct. Um, and
then it's like, "Well, just make videos on stuff
I'm interested in." It just so happens that other
people are interested in the same things
I'm interested in. And keep learning.
And I, when I produced bands, I never
let them take my picture, ever. I
never let them record me in the studio.
There's virtually no pictures of
any band I ever produced. So from 1999 to
2015 when I, December 2015 when that Dylan
video came out,
no one took my picture. There were
no pictures of me on the internet.
- You're fully behind the
camera kind of guy-
- Yes
- ... meaning, like, no...
- No. No pictures. No pictures with
people. "Hey, can we take a picture?"
I said, "No. No pictures with people."
- And now you're like- ... you're
the talent. You're the face.
No, I mean, but the again, the
thing you're leaving unstated there
is like you spent a lot of years, you know,
teaching music. Like, really exploring
music. Trying a music career of
like, trying to create, trying to
produce, trying to be a musician,
and all these... Not just
trying. Like, being a,
getting extremely good at
it. I just, I think in modern culture
there's a sense you want to sk- skip that
part. "I wanna be famous. I wanna..." You know
this. And that is a thing that's not
going to be in most cases effective as
a primary thing to chase.
- So I have an undergrad in classical
bass. I have a master's from New
England Conservatory in jazz guitar. Then I
taught college for... I taught jazz studies
for five years- ... from '87-
... to '92. Then I got a publishing
deal, my first publishing deal, in 1992-
... with PolyGram Publishing. And then
I became a producer when I was 37,
having no idea how to engineer, I
taught myself engineering. And then
YouTube. I taught myself
how to edit videos.
- And then you taught
yourself how to interview.
- And I taught myself how to interview. I'd never done an
interview before. I never was like, "An interviewer?
What?"
- You haven't just done that.
You've taught yourself
not how to do just YouTube,
but YouTube Shorts. Different-
- Totally different thing
- ... totally different thing.
- Totally different skill.
- And then not just YouTube,
but like, how to be like a,
there's a, 'cause you're both a YouTuber
and like a musician who posts
stuff on YouTube. YouTuber
means like you're thinking about
stuff like thumbnails and...
- Which I make my own thumbnails.
I've always made my own thumbnails.
- By the way, before I forget, I
think I speak for the entirety of
the internet thanking you for how
you introduce your videos and
how you close them. 'Cause you, this
is a big part of YouTube, where
people have a 30-minute
introduction to, to a five-minute
video. You just go
straight in. That's really
wonderful. That's, I mean, on, on, on all fronts.
I mean, I suppose that has to do with the
production skills that you have, of
understanding, cutting, cutting the fluff.
- To make a song.
- Yep. Yeah, cutting, cutting the fluff,
cutting the bullshit. I'll just get
straight to the core of the thing. I've
heard you talk about maintaining friendships
for a long time. You said never waste a
friendship. Can you elaborate on that?
- Yeah. That's one of my things
is that I really value the time
I've spent with people, friendships
and keeping in touch with people. I
talk to each one of my siblings
multiple times a week. I talk to
my sisters probably every
night, my two sisters.
Um, I have friends from
college, I got friends from
growing up, I have friends from, you know,
both colleges I went to. I have friends
from all different eras in my life
that I keep in touch with and
visit whenever I can, and...
- And you must have met some incredible
humans, and incredibly weird, and
interesting humans throughout your life.
So it's worth it, the effort
to connect and reconnect.
- I mean, it's pretty much everything
in life. Nothing means anything more
than the friendships that
you make in your family.
- Yeah, what's the point of
this whole thing, right?
- That's right.
- What's the role of music in
in the human experience?
- Well, hopefully to enlighten people and
to create the soundtrack of their life.
- It is, right? Music, music does
something. I'll get... Sometimes when
I'm alone I'll listen to a song, and
there's nothing quite like a song
that makes me truly feel, like
feel alive. And whatever that is.
Sadness, or hope, or excitement. Or,
When I'm working out,
listening to Rage Against the
Machine, like protest. Or as I was
listening to the Metallica, the,
I was relistening to the set
that they played in, in Moscow, just
hyped. Like truly hyped. I was
like pacing listening to it.
And there's nothing like that.
- I've never found anything.
- And I don't know what that is in the
human psyche that's that, but I'm so glad
we found it. We humans created instruments
that can vibrate strings and together
create harmonies and melodies, and
ones that reverberate through
generations and they carry that.
- It's one of the greatest things that
humans ever did, creating music.
- And all of that led up to you, some guy
being listened to by millions
of people on the internet.
This is all a simulation, Rick. And I've
been a fan of yours for a long time, like I
told you. This is crazy to meet you.
- Same, Lex.
- Thank you for everything you do
for the world, for celebrating
music. For helping us discover and
rediscover some of the incredible
musicians and songs that
have been created over
the decade, over the
centuries. Thank you for being who you
are and thank you for talking to me.
- Thanks, I appreciate it.
- Thanks for listening to this conversation with
Rick Beato. To support this podcast, please check
out our sponsors in the
description where you can also
find links to contact me, ask
questions, give feedback, and so
on. And now, let me leave
you with some words from
Friedrich Nietzsche, as I often do.
"Without music, life would be a
mistake." Thank you for listening,
and I hope to see you next time.